Good morrowCount Erizzo, you are early. Are you bound to the Palace?Aye, Donato,The common destination; but I goWith an old friend.What, Celso, thou turned courtier!I am a suitor to his Highness, Sir, With Count Erizzo's aid.What is your suit?One of the procuratorsThe Procurator of St. Mark's was the second-most prestigious lifetime office in the Republic of Venice (the most prestigious was that of the Doge). died last night;And honest Celsohere would fain succeedTo that good office.None more capable!You will not fail.Scarcely, I think;---and yetI hardly know. The old Doge likes me not:There have been murmurs in the Senate, cousin,At these long wasting wars; and he, I hear,Suspects me. I have doubts. From you, indeed,One word--It shall be said. Give me the paper.Yes, at one word from me---theDoge and IAre friends, old friends, the friends of forty years;Besides we have a pair of hopeful sons,Friends from the cradle upwards.And those friendsMay soon be brothers. Will not thy Camilla
                  Be Foscari's bride, when his rough mistress WarShall loose him from her arms?Aye; he'll returnToo soon,, whene'er he comes, to steal awayMy age's darling. Yet is he a boyFull of high thoughts, a noble princely boy,Kindly and generous; one that may deserveEven her.---Well, give me this petition,Count.Look on the post as certain.How can IRepay---He's gone. Think'st thou he will succeed?I know not. Either way works well for us.If he succeed, then will our party gain firmer foot in Venice; if he fail,We gain Donato.Say'st thou so?I know him.He's of a temper kind, and quick, and warm;A powerful partizan, but easily sway'dBy flattery or anger. Of such toolsAre Faction's ranks composed, not officered.
                     Celso, we'll have this Dogeunbonneted,This Doge who wears his load of four-score yearsEasier than I my forty. He contemnsMe and my brother nobles: he may learnTo know and fear our power. I tell you, Sir,These brows of mine do ache for that same bonnet,And ere this day be ended---'Tis, my Lord,A golden moment. The young Foscari
                  Is safe with Sforza in the Milan wars.Would I were sure of that! This is indeedThe only moment. Celso, I have here,How intercepted boots not, letters from
                     Both generals to the Senate. They have gainedA signal victory; Brescia is freed;And Sforza gives the unshared unmingled praiseTo Foscari. We must unthrone the Doge
                  Ere this news reach the citycity; for the peopleAdore the Foscari. Faugh! I am wearyOf this good Doge, this venerable Doge,This popular Doge, this Doge who courts and
                        wooes
                        woos
                     
                  The noisy rabble, whilst the Senators
                  He elbows from their seats. And for the son,With his hot 
                        valour
                        valor
                     and proud lack of pride---I hate them both. We must not lose an hour---The people must not hear---The Senate hates them.Aye, but the Senate---Well, my Lord, the Senate--Fy! I am one of them; I must not tellThe secrets of the Council. We are notSo stubborn as we seem; the popular voiceFinds there an echo; and besides the Doge
                  Hath friends. Here comes one.A fair morning to you
                     Count Zeno. I have scarcely seen you sinceYour lingering sickness.You look cheerily.The air of this new day is sweet and freshening,And breathes a health into the veins. I trustYou need no renovating; yet to stepFrom a sick bed and a dark silent roomInto the pure and balmy air of June,With the bright sunlighting so blue a sky,And sparkling on the waterswaters all around,Full of the living noise of trade or mirth,Air, earth, and sea all motion---it is likeReturning from the tomb to this fair worldOf life and sunshine! Such delight is wellWorth a sharp fever.Nevertheless am IContent with your report. A homelier joySuffices me.You are the happier man.Are you for the palace?No. We wait a friend.Then I must say good morrow. I am somewhatIn haste to-day.Good morrow,Count.That manWears in his courtly smile the consciousnessOf his high influence---the prime 
                        favourite
                        favorite
                      he!Did you not see how graciously he stoopedTo me his equal, even as he had beenHimself a prince---proud minion!---Doge, beware!Beware!--- Look, look, Donato too hath foundA check?See how he chafes! See!Take thy paper!I am refused. Good morrow!Nay, come back.Can this be possible? Refused! Donato
                  Refused by Foscari!I was a foolTo ask;---a double fool to pin my faithUpon this Doge's ermine.I regretMore than my failure the indignity---Forget it, Sir.---How go these Milanwars?---I say, Erizzo, could'st thou have believedThe proudest he in Venice would have daredTo treat me with such scorn?What! did he scorn thee?He chid me, schooled me, blamed my easy temper,That lent an ear to every cunning tale,A voice to every false designing knave.Dared he!And this to me! Why art thou notAmazed,Erizzo?No. It but confirmsWhat I have heard and scarce believed. The Doge
                  Is grown so old that he forgets his friends.Men say---it can't be true---and yet men say---What?That the Doge repents his son's betrothmentTo thy Camilla.He shall never wed her.Sir, if this Doge were king of all the earthHe might have found a higher, prouder titleIn father to Camilla! They are free.
                     Camilla's claims shall never interrupt---What is his project?Our great enemy, The Duke of Milan, hath a young, fair daughter,And she, they say---Tush! I have seen her, man!A dark browed wench, a beetle-browed,---no moreTo match with my Camilla than that GondolaWith the Bucentaur!The Bucentaur was a large, stately barge used by the Doge of Venice when performing the annual Marriage of the Sea ceremony. A gondola, by contrast, is a small flat-bottomed Venetian boat.---I will backand tell himThat Foscari
                      is free. Mine own Camilla!My prattling, pretty one! I'll back and tell him.No; rather come with me. What I have saidIs hearsay or conjecture; what is trueIs the misgovernment, the public wrongsOf this old Foscari, too old to swayThe power of Venice. This is not a placeFor such discourse. Come with me to my palace.I thought he loved my daughter! Thou art sure.Good morrow to your Highness.Dearest Zeno,This is no common pleasure. Thou the latestOf our late revellers, whom the sun scarce seesTill half his course be run---Oh! good my Lord,I meet him often ere I go to bed,The bright reproachful tell-tale!To see thee,But lately risen from a sharp sickness too,Afoot so early! There must be some cause,Some kind or pleasant cause---What brings thee,Count?This letter!No petition for the postVacant by poor Venoni's death?Oh!no.I should have grieved within one little hourTo say twice No to two dear friends. You met
                     Donato?Yes, so chafed he saw me not.Your Highness knows his temper.And I fearTried it too much. He asked of me that officeFor a known villain, an unusual compoundOf ruffian and of knave, the followerOf his kinsmankinsman Count Erizzo.Then the Count
                  Was waiting for Donato. I am grievedHe should be so companioned.He flung from meEre I could tell him that the post was givenTo Signor Loredano, a ripe scholarPining in penury, at the pressing instanceOf his own son.
                     Cosmmo! How like is thatTo his unwearied kindness.There is not,Unless I may except my Foscari,A youth in Venice who can vie in aughtWith Cosmo.And they are as differentAs the bright sun and and gentle moon, the seaIn sparkling motion and the quiet land.The one a stirring,braveand honest soldier,The other a pale student.Bless them bothMy noble boys! They have always loved like brothers,And soon I hope my pretty sweet Camilla
                  Will give them that dear title.Have you hadTidings of Foscari lately?Not for long,Longer than common.Last night at St. Mark'sThere was a rumour floating--none could traceIts source---of a great victory obtainedBy Foscari and Sforza.Heaven grant it!Sure we shall hear to day.--Now dearest Count, What is your will? You led the old man onTo talk of his dear children, till in soothHe had forgotten the whole world. Now sayWhat is that scroll?My lord---I almost fear---Dost thou believe in soothsayers?No!--Yes!--Not much.Why dost thou ask?Wilt thou not answer?
                     Count Zeno, thou art one to whom, being wise,A wise man may confess the cherished follyThat lurks within his breast. But tell it notTo fools, good Zeno.Then thou dost believe?I have some cause. What! didst thou never hearOf the old prediction that was verifiedWhen I became the Doge?An old prediction!Some seventy years ago--it seems to meAs fresh as yesterday--being then a ladNo higher than my hand, idle as an heir,And all made up of gay and truant sports,I flew a kite unmatched in shape or sizeOver the river--we were at our houseUpon the Brenta then; it soared aloftDriven by light vigorous breezes from the sea,Soared buoyantly, till the diminished toyGrew smaller than the falcon when she stoopsTo dart upon her prey. I sent for cord,Servant on servanthurrying, till the kiteShrank to the size of a beetle: still I calledFor cord, andand sent to summon father, mother,My little sisters, my old halting nurse,--I would have had the whole world to surveyMe and my wondrous kite. It still soared on,And I stood bending back in extasy,My eyes on that small point, clapping my hands,And shouting, and half envying it the flightThat made it a companion of the stars,When close beside me a deep voice exclaimed--Aye, mount! mount! mount!--I started back, and sawA tall and aged woman, one of the wildPeculiar people whom wild Hungary sendsRoving through every land. She drew her cloakAbout her, turned her black eyes up to Heaven,And thus pursued:--Aye, like his fortunes,mount,The future Doge of Venice! And beforeFor very wonder any one could speakShe disappeared.Strange! Hast thou never seenThat woman since?I never saw her more.After a slight brief search, the wonder sankInto a jest. My mother for a whileCalled me her pretty Doge, her madcap Doge,And rang a thousand fondling changes throughOn that proud title; and my sisters longTalked of the tall Hungarian. None believedBut my old nurse.And thou?Long time in meThe seeds of faith lay dormant; till at lastAs youth's gay wildness sobered, and ambitionGrew stronger in my soul, the prophecyKnocked at my thoughts, and I by fits believedThat which I wished were true. Now for thy scroll;--Whence comes it?Even such an aged crone,So tall, so habited, stayed me last nightAt my own door, and with an earnest voice,Her shaking hand prest on my arm, imploredThat, as I loved the good Doge Foscari,I would at his first waking give him this.She must be dead! Full seventy years ago--And then her locks were grizzled!--She is dead.And what, at fourscore years, have I to doWith fate or fortune! My long race is run.Read it at least.Grant the first boon! Why, my good Signor Celso,This is too palpable. Grant the first boon!Make thee the Procurator! Fy! Fy! Fy!
                     Erizzo's talent hath forsaken him;This cheat is shallow. They have heard the taleI told thee, and this paltry poor device--Off to the waves and winds!Yet hath the count
                  A party in the state; and for Donato,Kind, hasty, generous and beloved, his powerMay vie with thine.But never will be usedAgainst me,Zeno. I should hate myselfCould I suspect Donato. Count,we'll goTogether to the Senate. Thou shalt see The quick relenting of his sudden wrath,His graceful self-rebuke, his honest love.I'll gladly be converted.Doubt him not.
                     Laura, hast thou seen Cosmo?Not to day.Sure he'll not cheat us of his early smiles,His gay good-morrow, that best joy of homeWhen dear friends meet in morning cheerfulness.And such a cheerfulness! and such a smile!None are like his.None! Hast thou never seenThe heaven of kindness that in Foscari's eyesShines under those dark brows? And I'm the sisterOf that dear Cosmo, the selected brideOf that still dearer Foscari! Oh, cousinI am the blessedest creature that e'er trodThis laughing earth! There is but only oneCan hope to be so happy;--thou, perchanceWhen Cosmo--We were speaking of thee.Well,I trust fair maids. My gentle lady Laura,Say yes to that.Feed not man's vanity;Let not thy blushes answer.Sister mine,'Tis thou art clothed in blushes. Why the dawnOpening her ardent eyes, and shaking wideHer golden locks on the Adriatic wave,The bright Aurora, she is sad and paleAnd spiritless compared to thee. Hast thouBeen Psyche's errand?An allusion to the four tasks imposed upon the mythological Psyche by her lover Cupid's mother, Venus, in Lucius Apuleius' Metamorphoses.Or hath some fair visionLapt thee in loveliness?I think I dreamtOf heaven; for I was in a place where careAnd fear and sorrowcame not, self-sustainedOn wings such as the limner's cunning lends A limner is a painter of portraits.
                  To the Seraphim, andsinging like a birdFrom the deep gladness of a merry heartThe whole night long. And when the morning cameAnd I awakened in this work-day world,The spell was on me still; and still is onThe buoyancy, the joy, the certain hopeOf happiness. Brother, are there no newsOf Foscari?None certain. Yet is thereA balmyness of hope; and stirring rumoursCome pattering round us, with a pleasant sound,Like the large drops before a summer shower.They talk of Foscari and victory--There hath then been a battle. Is he safe?As safe as I myself.Fy! what a foolAm I to tremble so! And art thou sure?There is no certainty, but such a hopeAs is her forerunner. Hath not my fatherHeard of this victory?He hath been long Gone to the palace, and wished you to follow.Gladly. I have a good man's gratitudeTo pay to the good Doge. I must awayOr I shall miss the Senate.Thou wilt sendThe tidings,Cosmo?Surely.Quickly?Yes.Good tidings,Cosmo.Yes. My pretty cousinHast thou no charge to give?Why bring this tale,This happy tale thyself.Aye come thyselfDear Cosmo, and farewell.NowLauramineLet us to the high balcony. I needFresh air and sun and sparkling sights and soundsTo help sustain this happiness, this hope,Which weighs almost like fear. My dearest, come.He rules us as a king--this Foscari,An absolute king,haughty and imbecileAs any Eastern sovereign! He degradesThe old Nobility, contemns the Senate,And cringes to the people--a mob courtier!A greedy swallower of popular praise!He hates the Nobles.But this very dayDid he refuse to my dear kinsman hereA post, that he requested for a manWho long hath served the state.Refuse Donato!Even so. He is of the Senate, is the headOf an old powerful house, is rich, is noble,Is nobly loved. Are not these crimes enoughTo stir our Doge's wrath?No more of this!Then his misgovernment, his tedious wars,His waste of blood and treasure, that his son,That idol of the soldiery, may glutHis lust of glorious battle! Senators,Why should we thus submit to what we hate?Why bow to whom we made? The Doge is nowToo old for his high office. Good my lords,Let us resume our power. Is there no browIn Venice that may bear this ducal crownSave one? Will it not sit as gracefullyOn vigorous manhood's clustering curls? On thine,
                     Donato? Or, Pisani, upon thine?Or any man of us? Lords, have ye changedYour purpose? That the Doge may be deposedIs the fixed law of Venice. Are ye firm?This is the moment.He must be unthroned.Then be it done to-day.I'll join thee,Count.And I.
                     Donato, thou wilt best propose--Oh no! He hath been harsh--but I have loved him--We are old friends.Do it thyself,Erizzo.But gently, reverently.My gracious lords
                  I greet ye well!We are no truants, sirs,This full assemblage honours our fair Venice,Honours her senators.Signor Donato--Nay shun me not--That post was promised to--Thou wilt not hear! I have too often borneWith thy infirmity. Forget not, sir,That thou'rt my friend, or I must needs rememberThat I'm thy prince. Now to our business, lords.Are there no letters from the army?None.But there is through the city a loud bruitOf victory.In a well ordered stateThere is no pause for rumour; certaintyOutspeeds her lying rival.Think'st thou, count,That my old heart is quiet in this pause?Thou hast no boy in yonder battle field,Or thou would'st know how thirstily the soulOf a father pants in his suspense for truth,One single drop of sweet or bitter truth.Who's that?
                     Cosmo Donato, please you, Sir.Oh our young Secretary! Sit by me,I had just missed thee,Cosmo. Was thy friendContent?Oh never gratitude was clothedIn such pure joy. I would your Highness sawThe happiness you caused.Hush! Count Erizzo,You were about to speak.I was;and yetI gladly would delay, gladly resignA painful duty.If it touch me, Sir,Speak.Is there not,my lord, a law in Venice,That if the Doge, by sickness, grief, or age,Become incapable, he be removed?There is. Say on.What need I to say more!Know we not all the good Doge Foscari
                  Is turned of fourscore years? Fitter for himTo lay down the proud bonnet, which doth weighSo heavily on those white hairs, and passIn calm serene repose the evening hoursOf his unsullied life. So shall his sun,Setting in tranquil beauty, leave a trainOf pure and cloudless light; so praised and lovedShall he sink down to rest.This is not all.On, on, my lord!Fitter for us a manWho shall remember in this state of Venice
                  There is another power great as himself,And greater than the people. Howsoe'erThou hast the bearing, Doge, of a born prince,--To us thy subjects, thou art but the headOf the Venetian nobles. Thy proud rankWas given by them, thy equals. Each great nameThat now surrounds thee hath in turn adornedThy splendid office. Not a noble houseBut is a link in the resplendent chainOf old Venetian story. We are bornLords of the Adriatic; not a nameBut hath been vowed her spouse. Think not such namessuch namesAre common sounds; they have a music in them,An odorous recollection, they are partOf the old glorious past. Their country knowsAnd loves the lofty echo which gives backThe memory of the buried great; and weTheir sons--Oh our own names are watchwords to usThat call to valour and to victory,To goodnessand to freedom. This hast thouForgotten. Every creeping artisan,Every hard-handed smoky slave is nearerTo our great Doge than we: to them all smilesAnd princely graciousness--to us all frownsAnd kingly pride. Fitter for us a DogeOf a congenial spirit, to presideOver our councils, and to guard and guideThe Senateand the State.Perhaps Erizzo Would deign to wear this care-encompassed crown? Fy! Fy!My voice is for Donato, Sir!My father Doge of Venice? Never! Never! He will not, must not, shall not. All the world Would join in one reproach; the very stones Of Venice would cry out; and we, his children--- Oh we should die of grief and shame! What he Supplant his friend, his dearest friend? Oh never! Father, thou wilt not?Silence!Signor Cosmo Thou art not yet a Senator.My lords, I pray your pardon; but if I had seen A venomed serpent coiling round his limbs And pressing him within its deadly clasp, Would ye have blamed the cry that Nature sent?--- Thou wilt not be the Doge?Never!My father Forgive me that I feared. How could I fear! Forgive me. Noble boy!---Hast thou said all? That I am old, and that I love the people?Are these my crimes? Oh I am doubly guilty! I love them all, even ye that love me not! I cannot chuse but love ye, for ye are Venetians, quick, and proud, and sparkling eyed, Venetians, brave and free. Ye are the lords Of the bright sea-built city, beautiful As storied Athens; or the gorgeous pride Of Rome, eternal Rome; greater than kings Are ye Venetian nobles---ye are free; And that is greatness and nobility, The source and end of power. That I have made Liberty common as the common air, The sun-light, or the rippling waves that wash Our walls; that every citizen hath been Free as a Senator; that I have ruled In our fair Venice, as a father rules In his dear household, nothing intermitting Of needful discipline, but quenching fear In an indulgent kindness; these ye call My crimes. They are my boasts. Yes, I do love The honest artizans; there's not a face That smiles up at me with a kindly eye But sends a warmth into my heart, a glow  Of buoyant youthfulness. Age doth not freeze Our human sympathies; the sap fails not Although the trunk be rugged. Age can feel, And think, and act. Oh noble Senators, Ye do mistake my crime. I am too young; I am not like to die; and they who wait Wax weary for my seat. I do not dote, My lord Erizzo; Yet--- Foscari! Foscari!What mean those shouts?Francesco Foscari!There lives no other, whom a grateful people Would greet as with one heart.My Lord Francesco!My son, my very son! Now I am young And great and happy! Now I reign again, My noblest son!Father! Why this is joy Deeper than victory! Dost feel my heart?Art thou unhurt?Untouched. I almost shame To want one glorious scar. How well he is! What fire is in his eyes! Cosmo, thou too!--- But I have tidings that the Doge must hear Upon his throne. High tidings, gracious lords!  My father,---take thy state.Lost! lost! All lost! Another hour and that most hated boy Had been most welcome!Still as lovely, Cosmo? And still as true?Yes! Yes!Will not the Doge Assume the accustomed seat?My son, these lords, These Senators, these mighty ones of Venice Have found thy father old. Hadst thou returned Some half hour later, thou hadst seen the throne Filled by Donato, or his cousin Count. Which hath thy voice, Francesco?Thou not Doge! Erizzo climb into thy honoured seat, Honoured by thee! Or thou, Donato, thouJoin with this false, ungrateful, heartless senate, This shadow and this mockery of wisdom, To cast aside the best and truest heart That ever made our Venice rich and proud And great and happy, to throw off thy Prince Like an old garment! Shame! Thou that didst call Thyself his friend! Shame! shame! My dearest Cosmo,  This was a grief to thee. Oh shame! shame! shame!Rated again, and by a boy! I tell thee I would not be the Doge.My Lord Francesco, Thy tidings.Take thy state, Doge Foscari. From thee did I receive my maiden sword, From thee my high commission; to none other Will I resign them. Senators of Venice! Ingrates! I bring ye victory and peace. Victorious peace! Brescia is free, and Milan Sues at your feet for peace. Her haughty Duke Is Sforza's prisoner,---my prisoner, Doge, And Sforza weds his heir.Ha!Eight days hence He will be here. See what he writes, my lord. The Senate is amazed; yet from the field We sent ye somewhat of this glorious tale.Those letters reached not Venice.Count Erizzo, I met the messenger, and staid my horse To ask him of my father. He had stopt Short of the palace, but had safely given The packet to a Senator. Erizzo,  Thou wast the man. Look at him, ye that ever Saw guilt ooze out in shame! Nay, tremble not;I pardon thee. There is no other vengeance For low dishonour. It would stain my sword To dip it in thy blood.My Lord Francesco, I yet may find a time---I pardon thee.Sforza says here, this Brescian victory Was gained by thee. Zeno, read there---just there.Here is the treaty, Doge; already signed By Milan, Sforza, and myself: add thou Thy venerable name, Doge Foscari. So---having crowned a long and glorious reign With glorious peace, let me, thy son, pluck off This envied bonnet from thy honoured head. Wear it the worthiest! Never will it clip Within its golden circlet such high thoughts, Such a brave love of freedom, such a warm And generous faith in man. Proud lords of Venice, Ye ne'er deserved him. My good sword, lie there! I am no more your general. Pass we forth Together, my dear Father, private men--- Rich in the only wealth the world can give, A spotless name. Richest in thee. Nay, Zeno!Ye must not leave us, lords. Doge, if again We had to chuse, our choice again would fall On Foscari. Is't not so?Sail with the stream--- Foscari!---I'll find a time---Foscari! Foscari!One still is silent.Now, my Father, now! For thy fame's sake.On Foscari.Thanks! thanks! Now dare I look upon that reverend face, And grasp this hand again.Did we not know thee!Senators, countrymen, at your behest I wear once more the crown.Oh, no! no! no! Bear not again that burthen.My Francesco, Take up thy sword again, thy knightly sword--- I am too proud of thee!---thy stainless sword! Now, good my lords, our fellow-citizens Must be made happy in this glorious tale. First to proclaim the peace; then, with meek hearts,  Lowlily, with a steadfast thankfulness Pour out our homage to the Lord of Peace In his own temple. This high duty o'er, I bid ye to the palace; we must grace Our soldier with some revelry. Donato, Thou wilt be there, and Cosmo---will ye not? And our Camilla, lady of the feast, And of the heart. Come to us, dear Donato.Are all his taunts forgotten?No! I cannot.Think better of it, Zeno!---Follow soon, Francesco!---Zeno, is this storm the end Of our dark prophecy?Signor Donato, I have a feeling here of deep old love That tells me I have wronged-thee. If I have, Forgive me!Father, canst thou turn away When Foscari speaks those words which mortal ear Ne'er heard him utter?If I did mistake, 'Twas in my Father's cause; 'twas such a wrong As Cosmo would have done for thee. Forgive me, For her dear sake.Remember, "Shame!" Erizzo, Think'st thou I can forget! Not even for her. Stay me not, Cosmo.Go, for I can trust Thy kind heart, Father! Love, who is so strong In gentleness. Love and his bondman Time Will conquer anger. We must now submit. To-morrow---Oh! what a long life of love Must I give up! To-morrow! I am here, Here in this happy Venice, which she makes The palace of her beauty, where the air Is sweetened by her breath, and her young voice Floats on the breeze like music. I am here--- Divided from her but by envious walls, Clouds that conceal my sun. Had'st thou but seen How I urged on my mettled courser's speed, My matchless Barbary horse, till his pure jet Was pounced with snowy flakes; or how I strove To graft my hot impatience on the dull And sluggish boatmen: or with what a stroke I cleft the water; or how leapt ashore---I can believe 't---That I might sooner gain By one half hour her presence! And to bear  This longing till to-morrow! Thou must say All this and more, much more, of love and hope And fond impatience. Tell her---Thou thyselfShalt tell her these sweet things, mixed with a world Of lovers' eloquence, of looks and sighs, And broken words. Aye, Foscari, thou thyself!But how? Where? When?To night. For one short hour Steal from the feast its hero. My good father, Who, like a bird, fore-runs the summer sun, Seeks his nest early. Thou mayst ask for me And find Camilla.Blessings on thee, friend!To night!We have a hearer.He is gone.Beware that smooth Erizzo, dearest Cosmo, Beware!Nay, Foscari, let me caution thee Beware suspicion! Think him innocent Till thou hast proved him guilty. Blackening doubt Beseems not thy clear breast. Sweep it away.Oh, how I love the beautiful mistakes Of thy unbounded charity! That man---  Didst thou not see him whispering Donato? We will not think of him. Doth my Camilla Talk of me often?Yes.Oh, I was sure! But it is such a joy to hear that yes! Doth she---Hark! thou art called. The citizens Demand their General. Go!I'd rather face An enemy in battle.Thou wast wont To love the people, Foscari.I would drain The last drop in my veins for them and freedom; But these loud shouts, this popular acclaim, This withering, perishing blast of vulgar praise, Whose noisy echoes do shake off the flush Of Fame's young blossoms---Oh, I hate them all! True honour should be silent, spotless, bright, Enduring; trembling even at the breath That wooes her beauty.Come.Seek Signor Celso.---Baffled, spurned, contemned, Pardoned---the insolent! But he shall feel--- All lost! For old Donato, shallow fool, Hath in his anger a relenting spirit And will yield easy way at the first tear The fair Camilla sheds---the very first! She hath but to cry Father, and to hang About his neck and his light wrath will melt Like snowflakes in that rain. How the dull Senate Cowered at the haughty soldier's feet! Even I--- Thinks he I too can pardon! He shall find My hate immortal. Nothing stands between Me and the crown but Foscari. To-night--- This Celso, as I have good cause to know, Can wield a dagger well---to-night he goes To meet his lady love---to-night---alone--- I can detain young Cosmo.Celso, friend, Thou comest at a wish. Where hast thou been?Where I am stunned with shouts of Foscari, And dazzled with the glare of tinselled gauds Hung out to honour him. The palaces Are clothed with tissues, velvets, cloths of gold And richer tapestry. The canals all strewed  With floating flowers, through which dark gondolas Dart as through some bright garden. All is lost, And I must leave dear Venice. Count, farewell!Why must thou go?Ask my hard creditors.Celso, I have a thousand ducats here For him that rids me of a clinging plague.A thousand ducats!Hast thou still thy dagger? In, and I'll tell thee more. This very night!Camilla, why so drooping?This hath been A long and weary day; there is a heat, A gloom, a heavy closeness. See, this rose Is withering too, that was so fresh and fair--- The white musk-rose---that which he used to love.It was no day for Venice. 'Twould have been A calm sweet stillness in our country home, Bowered amid green leaves and growing flowers, With fragrant airs about us, and soft light, And rustling birds.The sky portends a storm. To bed, Camilla!Father! dearest father, Have I displeased thee?No! To bed! To bed! Laura, good night.He used to call me child, His dearest child; and when I grasped his hand Would hold me from him with a long fond gaze,And stroke my hair and kiss my brow, and bid Heaven bless his sweet Camilla! And to night Nought but to bed! to bed!Believe it, Cousin,  A thing of accident.And Cosmo comes not; He sends not to me---he that never broke His plighted word before! And Laura! Laura! Foscari is in Venice, is returned Triumphant, and he comes not, sends not, Laura! And when I ask of him my father frowns Sternly on his poor child.My pretty-one, I could not go to rest, till I had said Heaven bless thee!My dear father!What is this? A tear?Oh! gratitude and love and joy Are in that tear, dear father!---and one doubt--- One fear---Sweetest, good night!Foscari, father?To bed my own Camilla!Not a word.Something works in him deeply.Yet how kind, How exquisitely fond! Cosmo must know, And, Laura, Cosmo never flies from thee,  And thou may'st ask---I will, I will, sweet Coz! Look, dearest, at the glancing gondolasShooting along, each with its little light, Like stars upon the water. Whither go they?To the proud Ducal Palace, where they hold High feasting in his honour. There the dance, And the quaint masque, and music's softer strains Minister to his praises.And the ear That would drink in so eagerly that sweet praise, The heart that would leap up at every sound Rejoicing, the glad eyes---Would thou wert there!Ah! would I were, since Foscari is there; That is enough for me! Where'er he is, In tent or battle-field---Hark! what is that? That music? Oh 'tis he! 'tis Foscari! Dost thou not know the strain, the wandering strain, Trembling and floating like a spirit's song, With many a---Hark again!---'Tis he! 'tis he! That air belongs to him even as a name It thrills my very heart. Am I not pale?No; the bright blood floats trembling in thy cheek, Most like that wandering music.There is pain  In this excess of joy.He comes.Camilla! Sweetest Camilla!Thou art come at last Francesco!My Camilla---Come at last! Why this is chiding! Can'st thou chide, Camilla?Aye, or she were no woman.Lady Laura! Forgive me that I saw you not. Camilla, Chide on---nay thou art smiling---Come begin! I'd rather hear thy chidings than the praise Of all the world beside. Let me but hear Thy voice, whate'er thou speakest.Dear Francesco, Thou hast been long away.Oh very long!And where?Away from thee. That is enough; Where thou art not I keep no count of place Nor time, nor speech, nor act.Yet tell me where.Where I have dreamt of courts and camps and fields Of glorious battle. A long weary dream  To him, who loves to bask him in thy smiles, And live upon thy words.Yet hast thou lost Ten weary hours to-day.Why this, indeed, Is chiding, my Camilla. I have been At the Palace, at the Senate hall, at Church, Have undergone a grand procession, love, And a long dreary feast.And is that all?And is not that enough? Would'st thou crowd in More tediousness? Oh thou unmerciful!But why not first---sure he is thinner, Laura, Thinner and paler?Nay, he is the same.Why not first come to me?Perhaps I love To visit my heart's treasure by that light When misers seek their buried hoards; to steal Upon the loved one, like a mermaid's song, Unseen and floating between sea and sky; To creep upon her in love's loveliest hour, Not in her daylight beauty with the glare Of the bright sun around her, but thus pure And white and delicate, under the cool moon  Or lamp of alabaster. Thus I love To think of thee, Camilla; thus with flowers About thee and fresh air, and such a light, And such a stillness; thus I dream of thee, Sleeping or waking.Dost thou dream of me?Do I! without that lovely mockery, That sweet unreal joy, how could I live When we are parted? Do I dream of thee! Dearest, what ails thee? Thou art not to night As thou art wont, thine eyes avoid my gaze, Thy white hand trembles and turns cold in mine. What ails thee, dearest? Hast thou heard---What fear Disturbs thee thus, Camilla?I will tell thee. Cosmo is absent; my dear father grieved; There is high feasting in thy princely home And I not there; and thou not here till now, At midnight, when my father sleeps, and Cosmo Is still away. Are ye all friends? Say Foscari The very truth.Well! Thou shalt hear the truth. Cheer thee! 'Tis nought to weep for. At the Senate There were to-day some hasty words.---Erizzo, Thy subtle kinsman, he was most to blame---  I was too hot, too rash; but I implored Donato's pardon, and am half forgiven; Though yielding to the crafty Count, he shunned To sup with us to-night.Ah! I had feared---There is no cause for fear. This sudden storm Is but a July shower that sweeps away The o'erblown roses. Cosmo is our friend, Our truest warmest friend; and well thou know'st Thy father's kindly heart; he loves thee so; Aye, and he loves me too; and he shall love me Better than ever.He shall love! Lord Foscari Thou'rt a true soldier. Wilt thou conquer love?Surely.And how?By love, and gratitude, And deep respect, and true observance, Laura. Shake not thy head, Camilla. He shall love me. What is he not thy father! Smile on me. Think'st thou that if I feared to lose thee I Should be thus tranquil?No. But at my heart There is a heavy sense of coming pain, A deep and sad foreboding. Thou hast been Vexed to-day, sweetest, and thy weary thoughts Tinge the bright future with the gloomy past.Well, be it so. And yet I would to heaven That this one night were over!---Where is Laura?She glided off, with a kind parting smile, And a quick sparkle in her eye, that said Ye will not miss me!Aye, her merry glance;But we do miss her. 'Twas a saucy thought, My pretty gentle Laura!She is grown.Yes, tall and beautiful and rarely good. Oh 'tis the kindest heart! We think she'll make--- What is that noise?Nothing. A distant door. What startles thee, Camilla?My own heart. Hark how it beats, painfully, fearfully! Hush! hush! Again that noise!'Tis thunder, love, And that hath stirred thy spirits. Cheer thee, dearest; A soldier's wife should be as brave as steel. What did'st thou say of Laura?She will make  A sweet wife for our Cosmo.And doth he Love the young beauty?He hath scarce forgot To treat her as a child, the dearest child, The loveliest and the gentlest,---but a child. Francesco, thou must praise her---Ha! again! That is no thunder-clap. My father's door!--- Oh go! go! go!My dear Camilla, no! Thou can'st not fear me, I will be as calm, As humble---Go! go! go! I die with fear;--- He is so rash, so sudden;---He will kill thee!Here! Under his own roof! In thy dear sight! Thy own dear father!He will part us, Foscari! Go!Well, I go. But my Camilla---Go!Dearest, farewell!Not that way!---That! there! there! Leap from the window in the corridor, From the low balcony!Farewell! I'm glad That he is gone. Fear hath so mastered me I stumble on the level floor. Thank heaven They are both safe, my dearest Foscari, My dearest father! There's no danger now; And yet the night grows wilder. What a flash! And I have sent him forth into the storm, I, that so love him! I have sent him forth Into this awful storm! Protect him, Heaven! I thought I heard the window---Can those steps Be his?Help! help! base traitor! Foscari! Murder!What's that?Undo the door---I cannot--- Undo the door! My father!Who hath done This horrible deed?My father! muder! murder!Now for some stirring air to wake the spirits Of mirth and motion. Sweet ones, to the dance! Where is this Foscari? Gentles, in my youth He had been held a recreant that forsook The revel, and the light of ladies' eyes, And play of twinkling feet. Degenerate boy!Degenerate days! Ah! we could tell such tales Of the deep merriment, the gorgeous banquet, The high festivity of our old time! Thou may'st smile, Zeno, but his Highness knows Bright mirth is on the wane. Our puny sons Shew but faint flashes of their father's fire.Believe him not, fair maids! 'Tis but the vaunt Of vaunting age. Believe him not. Why, Moro, Thy father in those mirthful days hath said The same to thee, and his to him; yet still 'Tis merry Venice. Forty years to come We, too, may boast us of our jovial prime, Nor yet the world grow sadder. Fear it not. His Highness will not join thee, Signor Moro; He is too youthful-hearted.What a bribe Is that to aid thy cause! But Moro's right; We were fine gallants. Niece, I prythee see  That all are welcomed. Where's thy sister Melfi?Not yet returned from Rome.I would have had All the fair stars of Venice here to night Shining in one bright galaxy.We miss Signor Donato's daughter.Aye, indeed, My pretty sweet Camilla!---Fair Olivia, Let Trevisano lead thee to the dance. Were I one ten years younger, trust me, Sir, I'd not resign this hand. Now a light measure. Is't not a peerless nymph? The youngest Grace Leading her linked sisters through the maze Of blossom'd myrtles upon Ida's side, Is not so light of foot. Rest thee, dear maid. What is that? Thunder?Yes; a fearful storm. It rages awfully. Hark! there again!Well; we must keep such coil of merriment As shall outroar the rattling storm. Ah, truant! How wilt thou make thy peace?I read no war In these fair looks. Peace is more perilous.Aye, truly, Zeno.Whither hast thou been? Watching her lattice but to catch a glimpse Of the swift slender shadow that glides past So gracefully, clouding the soft dim light?Pooh! Pooh!And with a true devotion bent Uncovered at her shrine? Why thou art wet!This is some new device of gallantry, Some trick of Milan courtship.Tush, man, tush! Ho! a brisk measure! Drown with merry notes Count Zeno's merry riddles! Wilt thou dance With me, dear lady? Do not say me No!Oh, no!Why that should mean Oh yes!Good niece, Will not the Lady Claudia join the dance? Seek her. I'm young and light enough to night To mingle there myself. What ails the music? Quicker! Why break they off? Dear Zeno ask.Murdered! Impossible! I only left--- I am myself---It cannot be. Play on! On with the dance! Here is a man hath seen him, One who still shakes with fear.Bring him to me! Where is he? Where?Zeno, what is this tale?A tale of horror!Justice, Doge of Venice! A Senator lies reeking in his blood, Murdered in his own palace. Justice, Doge!What Senator?Canst thou ask that? Donato.Donato murdered! the beloved Donato! The second name of Venice! Mine old friend! Lords, to the council. This is not a tale For woman's gentleness. Good night to all. Would he had ta'en my hand!He is not dead--- It must be false, it shall be!What dost thou Doubt of Donato's death? Thou?Hearken, Doge! His voice hath mockery in it, sharp and loud As the clear ring of metals: he speaks not As we, who heard the tale, in broken words And breathless; his teeth chatter not; his lips  Are firm; there is no trembling in his limbs, No glare in his keen eyes. None but a fiend, Fresh from the reek of murder, could so master The human sympathy, the fellowship Of Nature and of kind.Yet wherefore---Justice!Beloved friend!Off! Off! I come for justice, For equal justice!Thou shalt have it.Doge! For equal justice!Was he not my friend? Am I not thine?Aye---so the murderer said!--- Friend! the word chokes me.Grief hath turned his brain.Thou shalt have justice.'Tis no midnight thief, No hired assassin, no poor petty villain;--- This is a fall, as of the morning star, A death such as the first great slayer saw When Abel lay at his feet,---but I'll have justice! There be hearts here will crack, old valiant hearts  When they shall hear this tale,---but I'll have justice!Go some one call the guard. Name the assassin.Have I not! Whither doth he fly!Camilla! My poor Camilla!Thine! And the earth hears him And opens not her womb! The heavens hear And launch no thunderbolts! This work is mine. Hold firm my heart.---Cousin! Erizzo!Seize Francesco Foscari. Nay stand not thus Gazing on one another. Seize him. Doge, He is the murderer.Away with thee, Traitor and slanderer! He is my son--- Stir not a man of ye!---My son, the idol Of city and of camp. His life hath been One blaze of honour. Come to my old arms,--- Speak not a word---thy name is pledge enough My son!Ye know your duty. Seize him, soldiers.Approach me at your peril. Know you not This very morning how yon serpent lay Under my heel unbruised, a thing of scorn?  Look not upon us, lords, with doubting eyes, Ye dare not doubt me---even to deny Is in some sort a stain!---My shield is bright. Ye force me to these vaunts! I could not think A crime. Bear hence the murderer.  Palsies wither The cowardly arm and plotting brain that feared  To strike him dead at once!  Seize him, I say, Now he that dares!Francesco Foscari, I do arrest thee for this murder.Thou! Come forth into the light! Off with those plumes! Look at me! Is this Cosmo? Hath some fiend Put on that shape? Speak to me!Murderer!To-day he called me brother!---Deal with me Even as ye will.Look to him, soldiers, well, That he escape not.Sir, the Foscari Know not what that word means. I wait your pleasure.Doge! Doth he hear me? Once I could have wept For such a grief, for him; now I am steeled By merciless misery, made pitiless  By one that hath no pity. Look! he stands With such a calm of virtue on his brow, As if he would outface the all-seeing God With that proud seeming. Foscari, the dead Shall cry aloud in heaven, and I on earth, Till vengeance overtake thee. Doge of Venice, I call on thee for justice on thy son.Father!---Oh, start not!---I am innocent. Hear that, and breathe again. Sir, I commit My life, my honour, the unsullied name Of my great ancestors, of him the greatest My living father---even his name I trust To my just cause, and the just laws of Venice. I am your prisoner.Doge!Those lights! Those lights! They pierce my eye-balls, dart into my brain! If there be any pity left i' the world Make me a darkness and a silence, Zeno, That I may pray.Lead to his chamber, Sirs.Is all prepared for trial?All. The Doge Approaches.Will the Doge preside?He comes. How different from his step of yesterday! How hurried, yet how slow!Let me assist Your Highness.No.His robes encumber him; Support them.Why will you torment me, Sir, With this officious care? These flowers are naught. Go bring me pungent herbs, hyssop and rue And rosemary; odours that keep in sense--- I have forgot my handkerchief.Take this.I am an old man newly stung with grief--- Thou hast forgiven me, Zeno? Are ye ready? Where is the accuser?May it please your Highness Call forth the prisoner.Oh not thou good Doge;  Spare those white hairs!Dare not to pity me! Sir, those white hairs are lichens on a rock. I tell ye, Sirs, since yesternight my blood Is dried up in my veins, my heart is turned To stone; but I am Doge of Venice still And know my office. Fear me not, Francesco! Francesco Foscari---Sir, is he there? My eyes are old and dim.I am here Father! Doge! I am here.Francesco Foscari Thou art arraigned for the foul midnight murder Of the senator Donato. Art thou innocent? Or guilty?Canst thou ask? The fresh-born babe That knows not yet the guiltiness of thought, Is not from such crime whiter.Gracious heaven I thank thee! Now the weight is off my soul. I sinned in my black fear. Where's the accuser? Let him stand forth. Cosmo---Signor Donato, Speak.Look with how calm and proud a mien The murderer stands, whilst the poor son conceals  His face against the wall.Speak, pr'y thee, speak.Alas! alas! I cannot. We were friends Even from earliest childhood. I loved him--- Oh how I loved him! Aye and he loved me, With a protecting love, the firmest love; For stronger, bolder, hardier, he to me Was as an elder brother. And his home Was mine, and mine was his---Oh he has sate A hundred times on that dear father's knee, His little head nestling against that breast, Where now---Oh Foscari, hadst thou slain me My last word had been pardon! But my father, And with a stedfast and unaltering cheek To listen---Cosmo! I am innocent. Yet, Heaven knows, I grieve---Camilla's father--- Poor, poor Camilla!Ah thou hast it now! 'Tis a fair woman's soft and liquid name That stings thy soul! Good, good.---Ho! Officer! Deliver that and bring the witness hither, Look thou take no excuse.Signor Donato,  I pray you check these pardonable tears. Were this a place for passion, what's thy grief Measured with mine? The death of all thy name To this suspense, this agony, this shame, That eats away the soul? What is thy grief--- Master thyself, I say. Francesco Foscari Stands there to answer to thy charge of murder. Produce thy proofs.Bring in the corse. My Lord And ye, the equal judges, spare the son This miserable duty. I can tell, For I by chance was there, this tale of blood And mystery. The late unhappy feud Is known to all. Returning from St. Mark's With my young kinsman in his Gondola--- For I had missed of mine---we landed close To the Donato Palace, as the bell Was tolling midnight. 'Twas an awful storm; But by the flashing lightning we saw one Leap from the balcony---a Cavalier Splendid in dress and air. The lightning glared Full on his face and habit, unconcealed By hat or cloak, and instantly we knew Francesco Foscari.Art sure of that? Oh sure! Too sure!He passed so close Count Zeno, That my cloak brushed his vest; but sprang aside, As he had met an adder, and leaped down Into a waiting Gondola. I called, But Foscari answered not; and Cosmo spake, Betwixt a sigh and smile, of fair Camilla, Of their long loves, and of the morning's ire, And how he hoped this dark and sudden cloud Would speedily pass away. Even as he spake, Whilst loitering on the steps, we heard a shriek Within the house, so piercing, so prolonged, So born of bitter anguish---to this hour That shriek is ringing in mine ears! And when, With trembling hearts and failing limbs, we scaled The stairs, we saw Donato bathed in blood, And poor Camilla lying on his breast, Her arms strained round his neck, as if she tried To keep in his dear life. The bloody witness Of this foul deed is here.Poor good old man! This is a grievous sight.Oh! Would to Heaven That I so lay, and so---I pray thee, on.  Where are thy proofs?They shall come soon enough. Donato, rouse thee! Look upon those wounds! Think on the honoured dead!I dare not think, For thought is frenzy. Lords! The Count Erizzo Hath told ye how we found the corse. This sword, The well-known sword of Foscari, was plunged Deep in his gory breast; beside him lay This hat and cloak, the splendid soldier's garb Of Foscari; no man had approached the house Save only Foscari; and his last word, Mingled with cries of murder and of help, Was "Foscari." Is that sword thine? Disown it, And, against oath and proof and circumstance. Thy word---thy naked word---Disown that sword, And give me back the blessed faith that trusts In man my fellow! Look upon it well.'Tis mine.He's guilty. 'Twas the last faint hope On this side Heaven.Cosmo! It is not his--- He knows not what he says---Give me the sword.'Tis mine; that which lay sheathed in victory Before ye yesterday; that which I bore  Triumphing through the battle. What a blaze Streamed from the sparkling steel---how bright, how pure, How glorious, how like the light of Fame--- A wild and dazzling fire! Both, both are quenched. The sword is mine; but of this foulest deed I am as ignorant as the senseless blade.Who heard Donato call on Foscari?Doge, thou hast asked for proofs, for witnesses; I have one here. Officer, hast thou brought The lady?She attends.Go lead her in.What lady? Sure thou canst not mean---Camilla!She walks as in a heavy dream; her senses Are stupified by sorrow. Count Erizzo, Why dids't thou send for her? Why bring her here? Had we not breaking hearts enow before Without poor, poor Camilla?She alone Heard his last dying words. Lady Camilla!She neither sees nor hears; she is herself A moving corse.Camilla! Speak to her.Sister! Heaven shield her senses! She is deaf  Even to my voice. Dear sister!Lead her towards The body. So! she sees it.Father! Father! Have I found thee dear father? Let me sit Here at thy feet, and lean my aching head Against thy knee---Oh how it throbs!---and bury My face within thy cloak. What ails me, Father, That my heart flutters so? Feel here---He's cold! He's dead! He's dead!Camilla!Who art thou? Where am I? Wherefore have ye dragged me forth Into the glare of day---Oh cruel! cruel!--- Amongst strange men? Where am I? Foscari! Now I have a comforter. Have they not told thee That I am fatherless? Dost weep for me? For me?Leave him; he is a murderer. Thy father's murderer!Who dared say that? Francesco, speak to me!Pollute her not! Touch not her garments! Fly his very sight--- He slew thy Father. Ha! Again! Again! Cosmo, this man is false. Is he not Cosmo? Is he not all one falsehood? Answer me. I will kneel to thee, Cosmo, for a word, A sign. Press but my hand. He lets it fall!Sister---I cannot tell her.Thou thyself Art witness to his crime.I never knew Aught of him but his virtues.Noble lady, Thou art before the assembled power of Venice, Before thy father's corse, before high Heaven--- Answer me truly, lady---Didst thou hear Thy murdered father call on Foscari?Ah!---He is innocent.Didst thou not hear Foscari's name mixed with his dying shriek?He's innocent! Oh I would stake my life On Foscari's innocence.Beloved child:Ah! Art thou there? Release him; Set him free! Thou art the Doge, the mighty Doge of Venice, Thou hast the power to free him.---Save him now From my hard kinsman! Save him! I remember,  When I was but a little child, I craved The grace of a poor galley slave, and thou Didst pardon him and set him free as air;--- Wilt thou not save thy son, and such a son, Who is as clear of this foul sin as thou? Cosmo, kneel with me!I have knelt for justice; And now again---For mercy! mercy!Answer! Demand her answer, Doge. She is a witness, Command her by thy power; thou art the Judge.I am, I am. Ye should have Dukes of stone, But this is flesh. Camilla, I am not A King, who wears fair mercy on the cross Of his bright diadem; I have no power Save as the whetted axe to strike and slay, A will-less instrument of the iron law Of Venice. Daughter---Thou that should'st have been My daughter, we are martyrs at the stake, And must endure. Shall we not copy him, Who stands there, with so brave a constancy, Patient, unfaltering? Let us chuse the right, And leave the event to Heaven. Speak, my dear child.Heaven guide me then! Lords, I am here an orphan,  The orphan of one day.---But yesternight--- Oh! did ye ever see a father die?Calm thee my sister.And ye drag me hither--- Ye call me to bear witness---me, a woman; A wretched helpless woman!---Against him, Whom---ye are merciless---ye have no touch Of pity or of manhood! Do your worst; I will not answer ye.Oh woman's love, Pure nurse of kind and charitable thoughts, Wiser than wisdom, instinct of the soul, How do I bless thee holiest love! Camilla, My brave and true Camilla, thou hast dropt Balm in the festering wound. Yet answer them. I cannot fear the truth. Ask her once more.Were not the last words that Donato spake Foscari and murder?Yes.Take her away; She hath confessed enough.Oh no! no! no! Foscari is guiltless! Hear me!---He is guiltless!Canst thou prove that? Thy sweet face always brought A comfort. Prove but that. All curses on The coward Celso! He'll escape me yet. The facts? The proofs? The witnesses?His life; My heart, my bursting heart. If I had seen With these poor eyes that horror---had seen him Stabbing---Oh, thoughts like these may make me mad, But all the powers of earth and hell can never Shake my true faith! Foscari! I will share Thy fate, will die with thee, will be thy bride Even in that fatal hour, and pass away With thee to Heaven---So! so!She sinks; she sinks; Her strength is over-wrought. Oh die not yet Till I may die with thee! Awake, revive, My plighted love! The bridal hour will soon Unite us my Camilla. Help! she faints.Fold her not thus within thy arms! Resign her!To thee! While still this arm hath marrow in it! To thee! Cosmo---thou---thou---Be tender of her, Be very tender---'tis a broken flower--- And pardon her her love. Take her. The pain Of death is over now. Proceed, my lords.Let me support her, Cosmo. Thou dost stagger Under her slender form. He spake to me, He gazed on me---I felt the long sad look Dwell on my face---he, at whose crime my soul Shudders, he spake---and I---men would have thought I was the guilty one! He bade me love This dearest, wretchedest. Tell him---No! no! Not even a last word.This hapless maid Hath owned enough. Foscari, wilt thou confess The murder?I am innocent.Confess; Or we must force confession. To the rack!Never whilst I have life! Am I not still The Doge of Venice? Rather stretch these stiff And withered limbs upon thy engines, Count! Rather crack these old joints! I thought that I Was steeled against all strokes---but this---The rack!Bethink thee of the Roman fathers, Doge, Of Brutus and of Manlius; thy son Will not disgrace thee. Come, the rack, the rack! I will front pain as a brave enemy, And rush to the encounter. What is the sense Of bodily agony to that which I  Endure even now? Disgrace, suspicion, scorn, Hatred and haughty pity, and that last Worst pang---her love, her misery. These are tortures! Let me have something that a warrior's soul May strive against and conquer. Come, the rack!Never.I must not hear thee, Doge. The question!Stop, on your lives! Forbear this cruelty, This cowardly cruelty! He will endure--- He will call up the courage of the field And die before he groans. His eye surveys That engine steadily, whose very sight Makes my flesh creep. Remove it. Oh to see That butchery---and the old man---the poor old man! Remove it.Well. Proceed we then to sentence.First listen to the prisoner. Foscari! speak.Yes; let us hear his tale. Defend thyself.To ye who doubt! To ye who disbelieve! Sir, there are spirits that can never stoop To falsehood; not for wealth, or power, or fame, Or life, or dearer love. Oh, were ye cast In the old chivalrous mould, pure diamond souls On which the dim polluting touch of doubt Rests not a breathing time! Were ye built up  Of honour---But to ye---Why should I speak When I have nothing but my knightly word To prove me innocent?You are well paid By this contempt, Count Zeno. Now to judgment.Father! He passes on and doth not speak; He cannot; he has no words,---nothing but tears. Oh, what must the grief be that forces tears From his proud heart---his proud and bursting heart! The flame of youth burnt in him yesterday At fourscore years; to-day hath made him old. What groan was that? What other wretch? Donato! Cosmo! Wilt thou not answer?Oh that voice Which was such perfect music,---which seemed made For truth and thought, fit organ, how it jars My very soul! What would'st thou?I would thank thee That thou hast spared one pang to a brave heart. That rack---To have seen me stretched there, to direct Each fresh progressive torture.---He had died Before our eyes! I thank thee, sir. No more. Unless a dying man, for I am sentenced--- Look how he sinks his head upon his clenched And withered hands! I am condemned, and we  Shall meet no more. Thou wilt not join the headsman To see the axe fall on my neck, nor follow The shouting multitude who, yesterday, Hail'd me a god, and, with like shouts, to-morrow Will drag me to the block. We meet no more; And as a dying man I fain would part In charity. We were friends, Cosmo.---Friends! I sinned in listening; but whilst he spake A world of kindly thoughts, a gush of the deep Old passionate love came o'er my heart---Forgive me Oh blessed shade! Friends! Why thy crime were common Wanting that damning dye---a simple murder! What though of one kind, noble, generous, Whose princely spirit scattered happiness As the sun light---a single sin! But 'twas My father, mine---avenging angel hear!--- Mine, that so loved thee.---That, at the first glance Of wild suspicion, the first crafty word Of treacherous hate, doubted, accused, condemned--- Chasing through shameful trial to shameful death--- Yet daring to call down the wrath of God On a false friend! Oh cunning self-deceit! Oh wondrous cheat of blind mortality!  Thus doth the Evil Spirit cast about To win a soul from heaven. They come. They come. Now gentle death. Speak! I can better bear Thy words than that long gaze of agony. I am prepared.Oh why did I resume This bonnet, which thy filial hand had plucked From my old brow, this fatal coronet, Predoomed to fall, that scorches me like fire--- Stings me like twisted serpents! Would I were A naked slave, chained to his weary oar, A worm that hath no sense but sufferance, Any thing vilest and most miserable, Rather than Doge of Venice! I must plunge A dagger in thy breast. Francesco Foscari, The council doth pronounce thee guilty.Ha!It works. It works.Thou said'st thou wast prepared.Aye---but the word! The first sound of the word!The council doth condemn---All, father? All?No; there were two---Count Zeno could not join  Guilty and Foscari; and I---my son, Thou couldst not do this deed!Thank heaven! Thank heaven!The sentence, Doge!Yes, father. The one pang, The worse than death,---the infamy is past. The dagger's in my breast; now drive it home, And with a merciful speed.Sir, thou will find Justice hath bowed to mercy.Doge, the sentence!The penalty is death. But for thy rank, Thy services and mine, it is exchanged For banishment to Candia. Thou must live In Canea, an exile, till thy days Be ended, my dear son.Live! Give me death! Ye that give infamy, and dare to talk Of mercy, give me death, painfullest death, And I will thank ye---bless ye! Give me death! Ye cannot give me life. Sooner the bay, That wreathes the warrior's brows, shall spread and flourish In a dark mine, shut up from sun and air, Than I can live without a proud respect A white unblemish'd name, the light and breath  Of honour. Death I say!---a murderer's death! Ye dare not change the laws.Live, and repent.Cosmo, if e'er you loved me, call on them For justice---bloody justice! Doge of Venice, Maintain the insulted laws! Send me to death,--- To instant death! Oh father, free thy son From this dread load of misery! Would'st thou see Thy only child shunned as a leper, father? Sent out into the world a second Cain? Oh give me death! death! death!I knew that life Would be a lingering agony; and yet To kill thee---my dear son! Oh prophecy Accurst, I feel thee now!Remove the prisoner. What! doth he struggle?Touch him not, vile slaves!A moment pause, and ye may lead me hence Tame as a fondled kid. Ye Senators, Ye kings of Venice, I appeal from you To the Supreme Tribunal.To thy father?To Him that is in heaven. Ye are men, Frail, erring, ignorant men, guided or driven  By every warring passion: some by love Of the beloved Donati; some by hate Of the high Foscari; by envy some; Many by fear; and one by low ambition. This ye call justice, lords! But I appeal To the All-righteous Judge of earth and heaven, Before whose throne condemners and condemned All shall stand equal, at whose feet I swear, By what my soul holds sacred---by the spurs Of knighthood---by the Christian's holier Cross, And by that old man's white and reverend locks, That I am innocent. Ye, who disbelieve, And ye who doubt, and ye, the grovelling few, Believing who condemn, I shower on all Contempt and pardon. Now, guards, to the prison.Look to the Doge.Zeno, when I am gone Thou wilt be kind to him?Even as a son! Even as thyself.Thou truest friend, farewell!Look to the Doge Gone to the prison! No! my lord Erizzo. I know Camilla.Well---I might mistake.Straight from her father's bier, where all night long She watch'd and wept, to seek---Go to, thou'rt wrong! Thou'rt wrong.Think no more of it. Doth the Senate Meet to-day?Was she veil'd?Who?Whom thou saw'st. She---not my sister!---Was she veil'd?She was.How couldst thou know her?By the pliant grace Of the young form---the goddess step---the charm Of motion. With such port the queenly swan Glides o'er the waters. Dost thou not remember When Foscari once---Avoid that name. Avoid it.She's here.And veil'd! Whence com'st thou, sister? speak. Why hast thou borne those tears and that wan face Abroad amongst the happy? Whence com'st thou? From one whose heart drops blood for this great grief.Whence?From St. Mark's.The Doge! The poor old Doge!The Doge! It was not by the Ducal chambers That I this morning saw---My lord Erizzo, I seek not to deceive ye. I have seen The Doge. But 'twas another wretcheder Of whom I spake,---one who hath long to live. I come from where beneath the leaden roofs Foscari lies.And she can speak that name Sighingly, fondly! She can cast aside Even maiden modesty! Forgive me, friend, That trusting her I doubted thee. Approach not! Thou art contaminate.He's innocent! Turn not away, shake me not off, as though I were some loathed reptile. Cosmo! Brother! We two are left alone in the wide world, And I, that sate upon that rainbow throne Of happiness, I am fallen, fallen.What would'st thou? How may I comfort thee? Sweet gentle soul,  Her tears are daggers. Speak.And thou wilt listen?Patient as infancy.He goes to-night; And I---nay, start not.What of thee?And I--- We were betroth'd; he goes a sentenc'd wretch--- But innocent, most innocent! He goes To scorn, to exile, and to misery, And I---I came to say farewell to thee My brother---I go with him.Ha!She raves. Look how she trembles; she is overwatched; This is a frenzy.Sir, I am not mad; I'm a Donato born, and drank in courage Even with my mother's milk. What if I shake! Within this trembling frame there is a heart As firm as thine. Speak to me ere we part, My brother! Speak to me, whatever words, However bitter! Any thing but silence, Cold withering silence!Sister! Bless thee, bless thee, For that kind word!My sister, sit thee down.--- Misery hath brought her to this pass.---Camilla, We had a father once:---he's slain. Would'st thou Join this white hand, which he so lov'd to mould Within his own, the soft and dimpled hand, With one---Oh pure as thine! Believe it, Cosmo; Pure as thine own!We have no father now, And we should love each other. Stay with me. I am no tyrant-brother: I'll not force Thy blooming beauty to some old man's bed For high alliance; I'll not plunge thy youth Into that living tomb where the cold nun Chants daily requiems, that thy dower may swell My coffers; I but ask of thee to stay With me in thy dear Venice, thy dear home, Thy mistress, mine. I'll be to thee, Camilla, A father, brother, lover. Stay with me. I will be very kind to thee.Oh cruel! This kindness is the rack.I would but save thee  From exile, penury, shame---He said so.He!Aye, he urg'd all that thou canst say against Himself and me---in vain. My heart is firm. I go. But love me still, oh love me still My brother!Listen.He said all.Camilla! I'd save thee from a crime, a damning crime--- Did he say that? From such a parricide, Such unimagin'd sin---I tell thee, girl, The Roman harlot, she the infamous That crush'd her father with her chariot wheels, She'll be forgotten in thy monstrous guilt, Whitened by thy black shame.Oh father, father, I call upon thee! Look on me from heav'n, Search my whole soul---'tis white. Oh when some tale Of woman's truth brought tears into my eyes, How often hath he said---Be thou, too, faithful In weal or woe! And now---farewell! farewell! Cosmo, my heart is breaking---Say farewell, Only farewell! Stay with me.No.Then go, Outcast of earth and heaven, of God and man! Abandon'd, spurn'd, abhorr'd, accurst! Go forth A murderer's bride---worse! worse! What impious priest Will dare profane the holy words that join The pure of heart and hand for ye, for ye, The parricides---Oh that she had but died Innocent in her childhood.One day, brother, Thou'lt grieve for this. Now bless thee!Stay!She's gone.Why let her go, foul stain upon our house! She was his daughter still, and yesterday An Angel! And he loved her and she him With such a dotage! 'Twas a sight to see How ere the pretty babe could speak its will, The chubby hands would cling and fix themselves Round its dear father's neck. Mother, or nurse, Or I, the elder child that played with her Full half the day, were nothing if she caught One glimpse of that dear father.Now she'll hang  Around his murderer's neck.Do ye all forget. That I'm her brother? Ho, Camilla!'Twill be A triumph 'mid their shame to these misproud Revengeful Foscari to bear off thus The glory of your house.I'll rescue her. Where is she? Is she gone? What ho, Camilla! I'll follow her to the end of the earth. The laws Give me a father's power. I'll save her yet. Camilla! Ho, Camilla!You must seek her With him. The time draws near. Now, Foscari, I have thee at my feet.Here then we part. Those Guards---send them away, Let them not listen to the last faint word, Nor gaze on the last lingering look Why doubt'st thou? Fear me not---I'll be a true prisoner. I am a Foscari still, bound by one chain, Honour. Send them away.Leave us.Aye, now My soul is free again. That tallest slave Stood brushing against my vest---he with the hard Cold stony eyes---and I---let not that man Go with me.He shall not.How can I waste A word on such a reptile! I'd a world Of sad and loving things to say to thee, But there's a weight just here---Oh father! father! I thought to have been a comfort to thy age, But I was born to spread a desolation On all I love.I would not change my son, Banished although he be, with the proudest sire In Christendom. But we must part. These men Are merciless. Implore no grace of them. And yet to leave this brave and tender heart To wither in its princely solitude, Friendless, companionless.Age hath one friend, One sure friend---Death.Oh I shall not be by To close thine eyes or kneel beside thy couch, Or gather from thy lips the last fond sound Of blessing or of pardon. Bless me now, Parting is dying.Bless thee, my dear son. Camilla!Bless her too. She is thy daughter; She goes with me to exile.She is blest In her high constancy. Beloved child Thy virtuous love hath softened the sharp pang Of this dread hour.Father! My only Father! Foscari, the bark awaits us.What, already?All is prepared.I should have told thee so; But when I would have said, Go! go! my tongue  Clave to my mouth.Already! Write to me Often. Is that forbidden? Yet the Doge May ask my Candiote jailer if his prisoner Be strictly kept. Then I shall sometimes see, For surely he will shew it me, thy name, Thy writing, something thou hast touched. 'Twill be A comfort.I will write to thee.And think Of me when the pale moon lets fall her cold And patient light upon the Adrian wave That sighs and trembles. Think of me then.Always. By sun, or moon, or star; in the bright day In the night's darkness, but one single thought Will dwell in my old heart---My banished son.Alas! Francesco, why wilt thou prolong This useless agony?He hath not said Farewell. One last embrace, one blessing more--- The last!What step is that? I crave your pardon: But I must pray the Doge to come with me  Straight to the Senate. 'Tis an earnest business. I do beseech your Highness. Leave him, Foscari! Cling not together as your very souls Were interlaced. The Senate, Doge, demands thee.The Senate! What! hath he another son To try, to torture, to condemn? Hath he Another heart to break? Yet go. For once Their cruelty is mercy. Go.Whilst still These eyes may gaze on thee! Ere yonder cloud Shall pass across the sun, a darker cloud Will wrap me in its blackness; then the throne, The judgment seat, the grave---no matter where The old man rests his bones!---One dim eclipse Will shadow all---but now---say to the senate That at their bidding I am sending forth My son to exile.Go! go!Doge, thy duty, Thy princely duty calls thee.To that word, Which was to me a god, have I not offered My child upon the altar? Is the sacrifice Still incomplete? Farewell! farewell!Francesco,  Embark not till ye hear from me.---My lord, This way.I pray you pardon me---I'm old--- I'm very old.Nay sit not shivering there Upon the ground. Hast thou no word for me, Francesco?Is he gone? Quite gone? For ever?Take comfort.Is he gone? I did not say Farewell, nor God be with thee! When men part From common friends for a slight summer voyage They cry Heaven speed thee! and I could not say Farewell to my dear father, nor call down One benison on that white reverend head Which I shall never see again. There breathes not A wretch so curst as I.Foscari, the lips That I have kissed are cold.Oh bruised flower, Whose very wounds do shed an odorous balm! My gentle comforter! could I forget Thy misery! Forgive me.I have left His bier, his bloody bier. Aye, there it is! Fortune, and friends, and home, to fly from them Were nothing---but she leaves the unburied corse Of her dead father, the dear privilege To sit and watch till the last hour, to strew His body with sweet flowers like a bank in spring Making death beautiful, to follow him To his cold bed, and drop slow heavy tears To the bell's knolling. She leaves grief to go With me, whom the world calls---Oh matchless love, Life could not pay thee! Matchless, matchless love!He, that blest spirit, knows thy innocence: And I---I never doubted.Matchless love! We'll never part, we'll live and die together, There is a comfort in the word. Camilla, Where are the guards, the ship? My heart beats high At thy exceeding truth. We shall set forth As to a victory.She's here! She's here. Move not a step. Dare not to stir. Camilla, Follow me.Who is he that dares obstruct The mandate of the Senate? I'm an exile Travelling to banishment. All Venice knows  The piteous story of the Doge's son Condemned by his own father, and of her His true and faithful love. Now leave us, Sir; Let us depart in peace.Murderer! Ravisher! I seek my sister.She stands there. Ask her Whom she will follow.He knows well. Francesco, The whole world shall not part us.Mine! Mine own! My very own! I've lost wealth, country, home, Fame, friends, and father; I have nothing left Save thee, my dear one; but with thee I'm rich, And great, and happy. Now let us go forth Into our banishment. Give me thy hand, My wife.Camilla, I command thee stay--- The laws of Venice give to me a power Absolute as a father's. Loose her, Sir. Let go her hand. I warn ye part. They'll drive me Into a madness. If thou be a man Let's end this quarrel bravely.Heed him not!Calm thee! He is thy brother. I disclaim her.Tremble not so! I am unarmed, Camilla.Dost hold her as a shield before thy breast? Dost palter with me, coward?Off!---A sword! A sword for charity!Help! Help! The Doge! The guard! Stay with them! Part them! Leave them not! Hold them asunder, Count, and in my prayers Thou shalt be sainted! Help.Give me a sword!Aye his or mine. I am so strongly armed In my most righteous cause. I would encounter A mailed warrior with a willow wand.There is my weapon.Why thou wast my foe! But this is such a bounty as might shame The princely hand of friendship. Not the blade Girt by a crowned Duke around my loins, An Emperor's gift, the day I won my spurs In the Suabian victory, not that knightly sword Was welcomer than this.Foscari, come on!I would thou wert a soldier!Now. The fates Work for me.---Ha!Erizzo.Is he dead? Alas! Alas! Lift up his head.Here! Here! Canst thou not hasten. Foscari! He's slain! Oh bloody, bloody brother! Kill me too! Be merciful! Help!Doth he live?Away! Thy hands are bloody!---Help, Doge Foscari! Help Father!---The old man stands stiffening there Into a statue---He'll die first Off! Off! Wouldst kill him o'er again?---He bleeds to death! Father, it is thy blood.My son! My son! Who hath done this?He is not dead. Support him. See how his eye-lids quiver. Foscari! 'Tis I, thy wife!Mine own!Thanks gracious Heaven!Seize Count Erizzo, Guard. Have ye not heard---  What spectacle is this?---Know ye not, Sirs, That Foscari is guiltless, that the murderer Is found?Hear that! I'm innocent! Hear that! The murderer is found! Nay, hold me not--- I'm well---I'm strong. Father, there is no stain In the long line of Foscari! Camilla, My Faithfullest---He falls. There wanted this To crown the brimming cup of my despair. We should have been the happiest two, Francesco, Since the first pair in Paradise---but he That was my brother---Peace. Who slew Donato?Celso, bribed by Erizzo to destroy Francesco Foscari by Donato crossed Slew him, and aided by the sword and cloak Dropped by Francesco, cast this deed of horror On the most innocent.Hath he confessed?All. Seize Erizzo, bind him.There's no need. The work is done, well done---Signor Donato, I thank thee still for that---and such revenge  Is cheaply bought with life.Oh, damned viper!Aye! Do ye know me? Not a man of ye But is my tool or victim. I'm your master. This was my aim when old Donato died, And but that Celso dared not cope with Foscari And sought to catch him in a subtler springe I had been now your Doge. And I am more. I am your master, Sirs. Look where he lies The towering Foscari, who yesterday Stood statelier than the marble gods of Rome In their proud beauty. Hearken! It is mute, The tongue which darted words of fiery scorn And cold contempt, and bitter pardon---dared To hurl on me fierce pardon! Ha! he shivers! His stout limbs writhe! The insect that is born And dies within an hour would not change lives With Foscari. I am content. For thee I have a tenfold curse. Long be thy reign, Great Doge of Venice!Aye, I am the Doge; Lead him to instant death. My son!'Tis I That am the only murderer of the earth---  I that slew him. Bring racks and axes---Live! I pardon thee. He pardons thee. Live, Cosmo; It is thy Prince's last behest. I've been O'erlong a crowned slave. Go! dross to dross. And bruise the stones of Venice! Tell the senate There lies their diadem. Now I am free! Now I may grieve and pity like a man! May weep, and groan, and die! My heart may burst Now! Start not, Zeno---Didst thou never hear Of a broken heart? Look there.Hush! He revives.My Foscari!Camilla! Is't Camilla? Is she not weeping? What canst thou weep now When honour is redeemed and a bright name? Why there should be no tear in all the world; Gladness is come from Heaven.Death! Death!This joy Is life. Who talked of death? I cannot die In such a happiness. I'm well.He sinks; Support him.Is he dead?  Beloved son. How art thou?Strong at heart. What are those shapes That hover round us? There! There! There!Thy friends.Friends! Have they heard that I am innocent? That I'm no murderer? That I do not shame My father's glory? Let it be proclaimed---Tell Venice---tell---He's gone.Mine! Still mine own! Bury me with him! He is mine.