Ay, this was wont to be a festal timeIn days gone by! I can remember well The old familiar melodies that rose At break of morn, from all our purple hills, To welcome in the vintage. Never since Hath music seem'd so sweet! But the light hearts Which to those measures beat so joyously Are tamed to stillness now. There is no voice Of joy thro' all the land. Yes! there are sounds Of revelry within the palaces, And the fair castles of our ancient lords, Where now the stranger banquets. Ye may hear, From thence the peals of song and laughter riseAt midnight's deepest hour. Alas! we sat In happier days, so peacefully beneath The olives and the vines our fathers rear'd, Encircled by our children, whose quick steps Flew by us in the dance! The time hath been When peace was in the hamlet, wheresoe'er The storm might gather. But this yoke of France Falls on the peasant's neck as heavily As on the crested chieftain's. We are bow'd  E'en to the earth.  My father, tell me when Shall the gay dance and song again resound Amidst our chesnut-woods, as in those days Of which thou'rt wont to tell the joyous tale?When there are light and reckless hearts once more In Sicily's green vales. Alas! my boy, Men meet not now to quaff the flowing bowl, To hear the mirthful song, and cast aside The weight of work-day care:---they meet, to speak Of wrongs and sorrows, and to whisper thoughts They dare not breathe aloud.Ay, it
						is well So to relieve th'o'erburden'd heart, which pants Beneath its weight of wrongs; but better far In silence to avenge them. What deep voice Came with that startling tone? It was our guest's, The stranger pilgrim, who hath sojourn'd here Since yester-morn. Good neighbours, mark him well: He hath a stately bearing, and an eye Whose glance looks thro' the heart. His mien accords Ill with such vestments. How he folds round him His pilgrim-cloak, e'en as it were a robe  Of knightly ermine! That commanding step Should have been used in courts and camps to move. Mark him!Nay, rather, mark him not: the times Are fearful, and they teach the boldest hearts A cautious lesson. What should bring him here?He spoke of vengeance! Peace! we are beset By snares on every side, and we must learn In silence and in patience to endure. Talk not of vengeance, for the word is death.---The word is death! And what hath life for
							thee ,That thou shouldst cling to it thus? thou abject thing! Whose very soul is moulded to the yoke, And stamp'd with servitude. What! is it life, Thus at a breeze to start, to school thy voice Into low fearful whispers, and to cast Pale jealous looks around thee, lest, e'en then, Strangers should catch its echo?---Is there aught In this so precious, that thy furrow'd cheekIs blanch'd with terror at the passing thought Of hazarding some few and evil days, Which drag thus poorly on? Away, away! Leave us, for there is danger in thy presence. Why, what is danger?---Are there deeper ills Than those ye bear thus calmly? Ye have drain'd The cup of bitterness, till nought remains To fear or shrink from---therefore, be ye strong! Power dwelleth with despair.---Why start ye thus At words which are but echoes of the thoughts Lock'd in your secret souls?---Full well I know, There is not one amongst you, but hath nursed Some proud indignant feeling, which doth make One conflict of his life. I know thy wrongs,And thine---and thine,---but if within your breasts, There is no chord that vibrates to my voice,Then fare ye well.No, no! say
						on, say on! There are still free and fiery hearts e'en here, That kindle at thy words. If that indeed Thou hast a hope to give us. There is hope For all who suffer with indignant thoughts Which work in silent strength. What! think ye Heaven O'erlooks th'oppressor, if he bear awhile His crested head on high?---I tell you, no! Th'avenger will not sleep. It was an hour Of triumph to the conqueror, when our king,  Our young brave Conradin, in life's fair morn, On the red scaffold died. Yet not the less Is justice throned above; and her good time Comes rushing on in storms: that royal blood Hath lifted an accusing voice from earth, And hath been heard. The traces of the past Fade in man's heart, but ne'er doth heaven forget.Had we but arms and leaders, we are men Who might earn vengeance yet; but wanting these, What woulds't thou have us do? Be vigilant; And when the signal wakes the land, arise! The peasant's arm is strong, and there shall be A rich and noble harvest. Fare ye well. This man should be a prophet: how he seem'd To read our hearts with his dark searching glance And aspect of command! And yet his garb Is mean as ours.Speak low; I know him well. At first his voice disturb'd me like a dream Of other days; but I remember now His form, seen oft when in my youth I served Beneath the banners of our kings. 'Tis he Who hath been exiled and proscribed so long, The Count di Procida. And is this he? Then heaven protect him! for around his steps Will many snares be set. He comes not thus But with some mighty purpose; doubt it not: Perchance to bring us freedom. He is one, Whose faith, thro' many a trial, hath been proved True to our native princes. But away! The noon-tide heat is past, and from the seas Light gales are wandering thro' the vineyards; now We may resume our toil.Have I not told thee, that I bear a heart Blighted and cold?---Th'affections of my youth Lie slumbering in the grave; their fount is closed, And all the soft and playful tenderness Which hath its home in woman's breast, ere yet Deep wrongs have sear'd it; all is fled from mine. Urge me no more. O lady! doth the flower That sleeps entomb'd thro' the long wintry storms Unfold its beauty to the breath of spring; And shall not woman's heart, from chill despair, Wake at love's voice?Love!---make love's name thy spell,And I am strong!---the very word calls up From the dark past, thoughts, feelings, powers, array'd In arms against thee!---Know'st thou whom I lov'd,While my soul's dwelling place was still on earth? One who was born for empire, and endow'd With such high gifts of princely majesty, As bow'd all hearts before him!---Was he not Brave, royal, beautiful?---And such he died; He died!---hast thou forgotten?---And thou'rt here, Thou meet'st my glance with eyes which coldly look'd, ---Coldly!---nay, rather with triumphant gaze,  Upon his murder!---Desolate as I am,  Yet in the mien ofOh, my lost Conradin! there should be
						still Somewhat of loftiness, which might o'erawe The hearts of thine assassins. Haughty dame! If thy proud heart to tenderness be closed, Know, danger is around thee: thou hast foes That seek thy ruin, and my power alone Can shield thee from their arts. Provençal, tell Thy tale of danger to some happy heart, Which hath its little world of loved ones round, For whom to tremble; and its tranquil joys That make earth, Paradise. I stand alone; ---They that are blest may fear. Is there not one Who ne'er commands in vain?---proud lady, bend Thy spirit to thy fate; for know that he, Whose car of triumph in its earthquake path O'er the bow'd neck of prostrate Sicily, Hath borne him to dominion; he, my king, Charles of Anjou, decrees thy hand the boon My deeds have well deserved; and who hath power Against his mandates? Viceroy, tell thy lord, That e'en where chains lie heaviest on the land, Souls may not all be fetter'd. Oft, ere now, Conquerors have rock'd the earth, yet fail'd to tame Unto their purposes, that restless fire, Inhabiting man's breast.---A spark bursts forth, And so they perish!---'tis the fate of those Who sport with lightning---and it may be his. ---Tell him I fear him not, and thus am free.'Tis well. Then nerve that lofty heart to bear The wrath which is not powerless. Yet again Bethink thee, lady!---Love may change--- hath changedTo vigilant hatred oft, whose sleepless eye Still finds what most it seeks for. Fare thee well. ---Look to it yet!---To-morrow I return. To-morrow!---Some ere now have slept, and dreamt Of morrows which ne'er dawn'd---or ne'er for them; So silently their deep and still repose Hath melted into death!---Are there not balms In nature's boundless realm, to pour out sleep Like this, on me?---Yet should my spirit still Endure its earthly bonds, till it could bear To his a glorious tale of his own isle,Free and avenged.---Thou should'st be now at work,In wrath, my native Etna! who dost lift  Thy spiry pillar of dark smoke so high, Thro' the red heaven of sunset!---sleep'st thou still, With all thy founts of fire, while spoilers tread The glowing vales beneath?  Ha! who art thou, Unbidden guest, that with so mute a step Dost steal upon me? One, o'er whom hath pass'd All that can change man's aspect!---Yet not long Shalt thou find safety in forgetfulness. ---I am he, to breathe whose name is perilous, Unless thy wealth could bribe the winds to silence. ---Know'st thou this , lady?--- Righteous Heaven! the pledge Amidst his people from the scaffold thrown By him who perish'd, and whose kingly blood E'en yet is unatoned.---My heart beats high--- ---Oh, welcome, welcome! thou art Procida, Th'Avenger, the Deliverer! Call me so When my great task is done. Yet who can tell If the return'd be welcome?---Many a heartIs changed since last we met. Why dost thou gaze, With such a still and solemn earnestness,  Upon my alter'd mien?  That I may read If to the widow'd love of Conradin, Or the proud Eribert's triumphant bride, I now entrust my fate. Thou, Procida!  ThatTill it hath
						found an answer. 'Tis enough. I find it in thy cheek, whose rapid change Is from death's hue to fever's; in the wild Unsettled brightness of thy proud dark eye, And in thy wasted form. Ay, 'tis a deep And solemn joy, thus in thy looks to trace, Instead of youth's gay bloom, the characters Of noble suffering;---on thy brow the same Commanding spirit holds its native state Which could not stoop to vileness. Yet the voice Of Fame hath told afar that thou shouldst wed This tyrant, Eribert. And told it not A tale of insolent love repell'd with scorn, Of stern commands and fearful menaces Met with indignant courage?---Procida! It was but now that haughtily I braved  His sovereign's mandate, which decrees my hand, With its fair appanage of wide domains And wealthy vassals, a most fitting boon, To recompense his crimes.---I smiled---ay, smiled--- In proud security! for the high of heart Have still a pathway to escape disgrace, Tho' it be dark and lone. Thou shalt not need To tread its shadowy mazes. Trust my words: I tell thee, that a spirit is abroad, Which will not slumber till its path be traced By deeds of fearful fame. Vittoria, live! It is most meet that thou shouldst live, to seeThe mighty expiation; for thy heart (Forgive me that I wrong'd its faith) hath nursed A high, majestic grief, whose seal is set Deep on thy marble brow.Then thou canst tell,By gazing on the wither'd rose, that there Time, or the blight, hath work'd!---Ay, this is in Thy vision's scope: but oh! the things unseen, Untold, undreamt of, which like shadows pass Hourly o'er that mysterious world, a mind To ruin struck by grief!---Yet doth my soul, Far, midst its darkness, nurse one soaring hope,  Wherein is bright vitality.---'Tis to see His blood avenged, and his fair heritage,My beautiful native land, in glory risen, Like a warrior from his slumbers! Hear'st thou not With what a deep and ominous moan, the voice Of our great mountain swells?---There will be soon A fearful burst!---Vittoria! brood no more In silence o'er thy sorrows, but go forth Amidst thy vassals, (yet be secret still) And let thy breath give nurture to the spark Thou'lt find already kindled. I move on In shadow, yet awakening in my path That which shall startle nations. Fare thee well.When shall we meet again?---Are we not those Whom most he loved on earth, and think'st thou not That love e'en yet shall bring his spirit nearWhile thus we hold communion? Yes, I feel Its breathing influence whilst I look on thee, Who wert its light in life. Yet will we not Make womanish tears our offering on his tomb; He shall have nobler tribute!---I must hence, But thou shalt soon hear more. Await the time.There is a shadow far within your eye, Which hath of late been deepening. You were wont Upon the clearness of your open brow To wear a brighter spirit, shedding round Joy, like our southern sun. It is not well, If some dark thought be gathering o'er your soul, To hide it from affection. Why is this, My Raimond, why is this? Oh! from the dreams Of youth, sweet Constance, hath not manhood still A wild and stormy wakening?---They depart, Light after light, our glorious visions fade, The vaguely beautiful! till earth, unveil'd Lies pale around; and life's realities Press on the soul, from its unfathom'd depth Rousing the fiery feelings, and proud thoughts, In all their fearful strength!---'Tis ever thus, And doubly so with me; for I awoke With high aspirings, making it a curse To breathe where noble minds are bow'd, as here. ---To breathe!---it is not breath! I know thy grief, ---And is't not mine?---for those devoted men Doom'd with their life to expiate some wild word,  Born of the social hour. Oh! I have knelt, E'en at my brother's feet, with fruitless tears, Imploring him to spare. His heart is shut Against my voice; yet will I not forsake The cause of mercy. Waste not thou thy prayers, Oh, gentle love, for them. There's little need For Pity, tho' the galling chain be worn By some few slaves the less. Let them depart! There is a world beyond th'oppressor's reach, And thither lies their way. Alas! I see That some new wrong hath pierced you to the soul.Pardon, beloved Constance, if my words, From feelings hourly stung, have caught, perchance, A tone of bitterness.---Oh! when thine eyes, With their sweet eloquent thoughtfulness, are fix'd Thus tenderly on mine, I should forget All else in their soft beams; and yet I came To tell thee--- What? What wouldst thou say? O speak!--- Thou wouldst not leave me! I have cast a cloud, The shadow of dark thoughts and ruin'd fortunes, O'er thy bright spirit. Haply, were I gone,  Thou wouldst resume thyself, and dwell once more In the clear sunny light of youth and joy, E'en as before we met---before we loved!This is but mockery.---Well thou know'st thy love Hath given me nobler being; made my heart A home for all the deep sublimities Of strong affection; and I would not change Th'exalted life I draw from that pure source, With all its checquer'd hues of hope and fear, Ev'n for the brightest calm. Thou most unkind! Have I deserved this? Oh! thou hast deserved A love less fatal to thy peace than mine. Think not 'tis mockery!---But I cannot rest To be the scorn'd and trampled thing I am In this degraded land. Its very skies, That smile as if but festivals were held Beneath their cloudless azure, weigh me down With a dull sense of bondage, and I pine For freedom's charter'd air. I would go forth To seek my noble father; he hath been Too long a lonely exile, and his name Seems fading in the dim obscurity Which gathers round my fortunes. Must we part?  And is it come to this?---Oh! I have still Deem'd it enough of joy with thee to shareE'en grief itself---and now---but this is vain; Alas! too deep, too fond, is woman's love, Too full of hope, she casts on troubled waves The treasures of her soul! Oh, speak not thus! Thy gentle and desponding tones fall cold Upon my inmost heart.---I leave thee but To be more worthy of a love like thine. For I have dreamt of fame!---A few short years, And we may yet be blest. A few short years! Less time may well suffice for death and fate To work all change on earth!---To break the ties Which early love had form'd; and to bow down Th'elastic spirit, and to blight each flower Strewn in life's crowded path!---But be it so? Be it enough to know that happiness Meets thee on other shores. Where'er I roam Thou shalt be with my soul!---Thy soft low voice Shall rise upon remembrance, like a strain Of music heard in boyhood, bringing back Life's morning freshness.---Oh! that there should be  Things, which we love with such deep tenderness, But, through that love, to learn how much of woe Dwells in one hour like this!---Yet weep thou not! We shall meet soon; and many days, dear love, Ere I depart. Then there's a respite still. Days!---not a day but in its course may bring Some strange vicissitude to turn aside Th'impending blow we shrink from.---Fare thee well. ---Oh, Raimond! this is not our last farewell?Thou wouldst not so deceive me? Doubt me not, Gentlest and best beloved! we meet again.When shall I
						breathe in freedom, and give scope To those untameable and burning thoughts, And restless aspirations, which consume My heart i'th'land of bondage?---Oh! with you, Ye everlasting images of power, And of infinity! thou blue-rolling deep, And you, ye stars! whose beams are characters Wherewith the oracles of fate are traced; With you my soul finds room, and casts aside The weight that doth oppress her.---But my thoughts Are wandering far; there should be one to share This awful and majestic solitude  Of sea and heaven with me.  It is the hour He named, and yet he comes not.He is
						here.Now, thou mysterious stranger, thou, whose glance Doth fix itself on memory, and pursue Thought, like a spirit, haunting its lone hours; Reveal thyself; what art thou? One, whose life Hath been a troubled stream, and made its way Through rocks and darkness, and a thousand storms, With still a mighty aim.---But now the shades Of eve are gathering round me, and I come To this, my native land, that I may rest Beneath its vines in peace. Seek'st thou for peace? This is no land of peace; unless that deep And voiceless terror, which doth freeze men's thoughts Back to their source, and mantle its pale mien With a dull hollow semblance of repose, May so be call'd. There are such calms full oft Preceding earthquakes. But I have not been So vainly school'd by fortune, and inured To shape my course on peril's dizzy brink,  That it should irk my spirit to put on Such guise of hush'd submissiveness as best May suit the troubled aspect of the times.Why, then, thou art welcome, stranger! to the land Where most disguise is needful.---He were bold Who now should wear his thoughts upon his brow Beneath Sicilian skies. The brother's eye Doth search distrustfully the brother's face; And friends, whose undivided lives have drawn From the same past, their long remembrances, Now meet in terror, or no more; lest hearts Full to o'erflowing, in their social hour, Should pour out some rash word, which roving winds Might whisper to our conquerors.---This it is, To wear a foreign yoke. It matters not To him who holds the mastery o'er his spirit, And can suppress its workings, till endurance Becomes as nature. We can tame ourselves To all extremes, and there is that in life To which we cling with most tenacious grasp, Ev'n when its lofty claims are all reduced To the poor common privilege of breathing.--- Why dost thou turn away? What would'st thou with me?  I deem'd thee, by th'ascendant soul which liv'd, And made its throne on thy commanding brow, One of a sovereign nature, which would scorn So to abase its high capacities For aught on earth.---But thou art like the rest. What would'st thou with me? I would counsel thee. Thou must do that which men---ay, valiant men,--- Hourly submit to do; in the proud court, And in the stately camp, and at the board Of midnight revellers, whose flush'd mirth is all A strife, won hardly.---Where is he, whose heart Lies bare, thro' all its foldings, to the gaze Of mortal eye?---If vengeance wait the foe, Or fate th'oppressor, 'tis in depths conceal'd Beneath a smiling surface.---Youth! I say Keep thy soul down!---Put on a mask!---'tis worn Alike by power and weakness, and the smooth And specious intercourse of life requires Its aid in every scene. Away, dissembler! Life hath its high and its ignoble tasks, Fitted to every nature. Will the free And royal eagle stoop to learn the arts By which the serpent wins his spell-bound prey? It is because I will not clothe myselfIn a vile garb of coward semblances, That now, e'en now, I struggle with my heart, To bid what most I love a long farewell, And seek my country on some distant shore, Where such things are unknown! Why, this is joy! After long conflict with the doubts and fears, And the poor subtleties of meaner minds, To meet a spirit, whose bold elastic wing Oppression hath not crush'd.---High-hearted youth! Thy father, should his footsteps e'er again Visit these shores--- My father! what of him? Speak! was he known to thee? In distant lands With him I've traversed many a wild, and look'd On many a danger; and the thought that thou Wert smiling then in peace, a happy boy, Oft thro' the storm hath cheer'd him. Dost thou deem That still he lives?---Oh! if it be in chains, In woe, in poverty's obscurest cell, Say but he lives---and I will track his steps E'en to earth's verge! It may be that he lives: Tho' long his name hath ceased to be a word Familiar in man's dwellings. But its sound May yet be heard!---Raimond di Procida, ---Rememberest thou thy father? From my mind His form hath faded long, for years have pass'd Since he went forth to exile: but a vague, Yet powerful, image of deep majesty, Still dimly gathering round each thought of him, Doth claim instinctive reverence; and my love For his inspiring name hath long become Part of my being. Raimond! doth no voice Speak to thy soul, and tell thee whose the arms That would enfold thee now?---My son! my son!Father!---Oh God!---my father! Now I know Why my heart woke before thee! Oh! this hour Makes hope, reality; for thou art all My dreams had pictured thee! Yet why so long, Ev'n as a stranger, hast thou cross'd my paths, One nameless and unknown?---and yet I felt Each pulse within me thrilling to thy voice. Because I would not link thy fate with mine, Till I could hail the day-spring of that hope Which now is gathering round us.---Listen, youth! Thou hast told me of a subdued, and scorn'd,And trampled land, whose very soul is bow'd And fashion'd to her chains:---but I tell theeOf a most generous and devoted land, A land of kindling energies; a land Of glorious recollections!---proudly true To the high memory of her ancient kings, And rising, in majestic scorn, to cast Her alien bondage off! And where is this? Here, in our isle, our own fair Sicily! Her spirit is awake, and moving on, In its deep silence mightier, to regain Her place amongst the nations; and the hour Of that tremendous effort is at hand.Can it be thus indeed?---Thou pour'st new life Thro' all my burning veins!---I am as one Awakening from a chill and death-like sleep To the full glorious day. Thou shalt hear more!  Thou shalt hear things which would,---whichThe proud, free spirits of our ancestors  E'en from their marble rest. Yet mark me well! Be secret!---for along my destin'd path I yet must darkly move.---Now, follow me; And join a band of men, in whose high hearts There lies a nation's strength. My noble father! Thy words have given me all for which I pined--- An aim, a hope, a purpose!---And the blood Doth rush in warmer currents thro' my veins, As a bright fountain from its icy bonds By the quick sun-stroke freed. Ay, this is well! Such natures burst men's chains!---Now, follow me.Thy vassals are prepared then? Yes, they wait Thy summons to their task. Keep the flame bright, But hidden, till its hour.---Wouldst thou dare, lady, To join our councils at the night's mid-watch, In the lone cavern by the rock-hewn cross?What should I shrink from? Oh! the forest-paths Are dim and wild, e'en when the sunshine streams Thro' their high arches: but when powerful night Comes, with her cloudy phantoms, and her pale Uncertain moonbeams, and the hollow sounds Of her mysterious winds; their aspect then
					Is of another and more fearful world; A realm of indistinct and shadowy forms, Wakening strange thoughts, almost too much for this, Our frail terrestrial nature. Well I know All this, and more. Such scenes have been th'abodes Where thro' the silence of my soul have pass'd Voices, and visions from the sphere of those That have to die no more!---Nay, doubt it not! If such unearthly intercourse hath e'er  Been granted to our nature, 'tis to hearts Whose love is with the dead. They, they alone, Unmadden'd could sustain the fearful joy And glory of its trances!---at the hour Which makes guilt tremulous, and peoples earth And air with infinite, viewless multitudes, I will be with thee, Procida. Thy presence Will kindle nobler thoughts, and, in the souls Of suffering and indignant men, arouse That which may strengthen our majestic cause With yet a deeper power.---Know'st thou the spot?Full well. There is no scene so wild and lone In these dim woods, but I have visited Its tangled shades. At midnight then we meet. Why should I fear?---Thou wilt be with me, thou, Th'immortal dream and shadow of my soul, Spirit of him I love! that meet'st me still In loneliness and silence; in the noon Of the wild night, and in the forest-depths, Known but to me; for whom thou giv'st the winds And sighing leaves a cadence of thy voice, Till my heart faints with that o'erthrilling joy! ---Thou wilt be with me there, and lend my lips  Words, fiery words, to flush dark cheeks with shame, That thou art unavenged! And know you not my story? In the lands Where I have been a wanderer, your deep wrongs Were number'd with our country's; but their tale Came only in faint echoes to mine ear. I would fain hear it now. Hark! while you spoke, There was a voice-like murmur in the breeze, Which ev'n like death came o'er me:---'twas a night Like this, of clouds contending with the moon, A night of sweeping winds, of rustling leaves, And swift wild shadows floating o'er the earth, Clothed with a phantom-life; when, after years Of battle and captivity, I spurr'd My good steed homewards.---Oh! what lovely dreams Rose on my spirit!---There were tears and smiles, But all of joy!---And there were bounding steps, And clinging arms, whose passionate clasp of love Doth twine so fondly round the warrior's neck, When his plumed helm is doff'd.---Hence, feeble thoughts! ---I am sterner now, yet once such dreams were mine!And were they realiz'd? Youth! Ask me not, But listen!---I drew near my own fair home;  There was no light along its walls, no sound Of bugle pealing from the watch-tower's height At my approach, although my trampling steed Made the earth ring; yet the wide gates were thrown All open.---Then my heart misgave me first, And on the threshold of my silent hall I paused a moment, and the wind swept by With the same deep and dirge-like tone which pierced My soul e'en now.---I call'd---my struggling voice Gave utterance to my wife's, my children's, names; They answer'd not---I roused my failing strength, And wildly rush'd within---and they were there.And was all well? Ay, well!---for death is well, And they were all at rest!---I see them yet, Pale in their innocent beauty, which had fail'd To stay th'assassin's arm! Oh, righteous heaven! Who had done this? Who! Can'st thou question, who ?Whom hath the earth to perpetrate such deeds, In the cold-blooded revelry of crime, But those whose yoke is on us? Man of woe!  What words hath pity for despair like thine?Pity!---fond youth!---My soul disdains the grief Which doth unbosom its deep secrecies, To ask a vain companionship of tears, And so to be relieved! For woes like these, There is no sympathy but vengeance. None! Therefore I brought you hither, that your hearts Might catch the spirit of the scene!---Look round! We are in the awful presence of the dead; Within yon tomb they sleep, whose gentle blood Weighs down the murderer's soul.---Am wakeful o'er their dust!---I laid my
						sword, Without its sheath, on their sepulchral stone, As on an altar; and th'eternal stars, And heaven, and night, bore witness to my vow, No more to wield it save in one great cause, The vengeance of the grave!---And now the hour Of that atonement comes! My spirit burns! And my full heart almost to bursting swells. ---Oh! for the day of battle! Raimond! they Whose souls are dark with guiltless blood must die;  ---But not in battle.  How, my father!  No! Look on that sepulchre, and it will teach Another lesson.---But th'appointed hour Advances.---Thou wilt join our chosen band, Noble Montalba? Leave me for a time, That I may calm my soul by intercourse With the still dead, before I mix with men, And with their passions. I have nursed for years, In silence and in solitude, the flame Which doth consume me; and it is not used Thus to be look'd or breath'd on.---Procida! I would be tranquil---or appear so---ere I join your brave confederates. Thro' my heart There struck a pang---but it will soon have pass'd.Remember!---in the cavern by the cross. Now, follow me, my son.Said he, " my son ?"---Now, why should this
						man's lifeGo down in hope, thus resting on a son, And I be desolate?---How strange a sound Was that---" my son !"---I had a boy, who mightHave worn as free a soul upon his brow As doth this youth.---Why should the thought of him
					 Thus haunt me?---when I tread the peopled ways Of life again, I shall be pass'd each hour By fathers with their children, and I must Learn calmly to look on.---Methinks 'twere now A gloomy consolation to behold All men bereft, as I am!---But away, Vain thoughts!---One task is left for blighted hearts, And it shall be fulfill'd. And it is thus, beneath the solemn skies Of midnight, and in solitary caves, Where the wild forest-creatures make their lair,--- Is't thus the chiefs of Sicily must hold The councils of their country! Why, such scenes In their primeval majesty, beheld Thus by faint starlight, and the partial glare Of the red-streaming lava, will inspire Far deeper thoughts than pillar'd halls, wherein Statesmen hold weary vigils.---Are we not O'ershadow'd by that Etna, which of old With its dread prophecies, hath struck dismay Thro' tyrants' hearts, and bade them seek a home In other climes?---Hark! from its depths e'en now What hollow moans are sent!Welcome, my brave associates!---We can share The wolf's wild freedom here!---Th'oppressor's haunt Is not midst rocks and caves. Are we all met?All, all!The torchlight, sway'd by every gust, But dimly shows your features.---Where is he Who from his battles had return'd to breathe Once more, without a corslet, and to meet  The voices, and the footsteps, and the smiles, Blent with his dreams of home?---Of that dark tale The rest is known to vengeance!---Art thou here, With thy deep wrongs and resolute despair, Childless Montalba?He is at thy side. Call on that desolate father, in the hour When his revenge is nigh. Thou, too, come forth, From thine own halls an exile!---Dost thou make The mountain-fastnesses thy dwelling still, While hostile banners, o'er thy rampart walls, Wave their proud blazonry? Even so. I stood Last night before my own ancestral towers An unknown outcast, while the tempest beat On my bare head---what reck'd it?---There was joy Within, and revelry; the festive lamps Were streaming from each turret, and gay songs, I'th'stranger's tongue, made mirth. They little deem'd Who heard their melodies!---but there are thoughts Best nurtured in the wild; there are dread vows Known to the mountain-echoes.---Procida! Call on the outcast when revenge is nigh.I knew a young Sicilian, one whose heart  Should be all fire. On that most guilty day, When, with our martyr'd Conradin, the flower Of the land's knighthood perish'd; he, of whom I speak, a weeping boy, whose innocent tears Melted a thousand hearts that dared not aid, Stood by the scaffold, with extended arms, Calling upon his father, whose last look Turn'd full on him its parting agony. That father's blood gush'd o'er him!---and the boy Then dried his tears, and, with a kindling eye, And a proud flush on his young cheek, look'd up To the bright heaven.---Doth he remember still That bitter hour? He bears a sheathless sword! ---Call on the orphan when revenge is nigh.Our band shows gallantly---but there are men Who should be with us now, had they not dared In some wild moment of festivity To give their full hearts way, and breathe a wish For freedom!---and some traitor---it might be A breeze perchance---bore the forbidden sound To Eribert:---so they must die---unless Fate, (who at times is wayward) should select Some other victim first!---But have they not Brothers or sons amongst us? Look on me! I have a brother, a young high-soul'd boy, And beautiful as a sculptor's dream, with brow That wears, amidst its dark rich curls, the stamp Of inborn nobleness. In truth, he is A glorious creature!---But his doom is seal'd With their's of whom you spoke; and I have knelt--- ---Ay, scorn me not! 'twas for his life---I knelt E'en at the viceroy's feet, and he put on That heartless laugh of cold malignity We know so well, and spurn'd me.---But the stain Of shame like this, takes blood to wash it off, And thus it shall be cancell'd!---Call on me,When the stern moment of revenge is nigh.I call upon thee now ! The land's high soulIs roused, and moving onward, like a breeze Or a swift sunbeam, kindling nature's hues To deeper life before it. In his chains, The peasant dreams of freedom!---ay, 'tis thus Oppression fans th'imperishable flame With most unconscious hands.---No praise be her's For what she blindly works!---When slavery's cup O'erflows its bounds, the creeping poison, meant To dull our senses, thro' each burning vein Pours fever, lending a delirious strength To burst man's fetters---and they shall be burst!I have hoped, when hope seemed frenzy; but a power Abides in human will, when bent with strong Unswerving energy on one great aim, To make and rule its fortunes!---I have been A wanderer in the fulness of my years, A restless pilgrim of the earth and seas, Gathering the generous thoughts of other lands, To aid our holy cause. And aid is near: But we must give the signal. Now, before The majesty of yon pure heaven, whose eye Is on our hearts, whose righteous arm befriends The arm that strikes for freedom; speak! decree The fate of our oppressors. Let them fall When dreaming least of peril!---When the heart, Basking in sunny pleasure, doth forget That hate may smile, but sleeps not.---Hide the sword With a thick veil of myrtle, and in halls Of banquetting, where the full wine-cup shines Red in the festal torch-light; meet we there, And bid them welcome to the feast of death.Thy voice is low and broken, and thy words Scarce meet our ears. Why, then, I thus repeat  Their import. Let th'avenging sword burst forth In some free festal hour, and woe to him Who first shall spare! Must innocence and guilt Perish alike? Who talks of innocence?  When hathLet them all
						perish!---Heaven will chuse its own. Why should their children live?---The earthquake whelmsIts undistinguish'd thousands, making graves Of peopled cities in its path---and this Is Heaven's dread justice---ay, and it is well! Why then should we be tender, when the skiesDeal thus with man?---What, if the infant bleed? Is there not power to hush the mother's pangs? What, if the youthful bride perchance should fall In her triumphant beauty?---Should we pause? As if death were not mercy to the pangs Which make our lives the records of our foes? Let them all perish!---And if one be found Amidst our band, to stay th'avenging steel For pity, or remorse, or boyish love, Then be his doom as theirs!  Why gaze ye thus? Brethren, what means your silence? Be it so! If one amongst us stay th'avenging steel For love or pity, be his doom as theirs! Pledge we our faith to this!Our
						faith to this ! No! I butMy countrymen, my father!---Is it
						thus That freedom should be won?---Awake! Awake To loftier thoughts!---Lift up, exultingly, On the crown'd heights, and to the sweeping winds, Your glorious banner!---Let your trumpet's blast Make the tombs thrill with echoes! Call aloud, Proclaim from all your hills, the land shall bear The stranger's yoke no longer!---What is he Who carries on his practised lip a smile, Beneath his vest a dagger, which but waits Till the heart bounds with joy, to still its beatings? That which our nature's instinct doth recoil from, And our blood curdle at---Ay, yours and mine--- A murderer!---Heard ye?---Shall that name with ours Go down to after days?---Oh, friends! a cause Like that for which we rise, hath made bright names Of the elder time as rallying-words to men, Sounds full of might and immortality! And shall not ours be such? Fond dreamer, peace! Fame! What is fame?---Will our unconscious dust Start into thrilling rapture from the grave, And the vain breath of praise?---I tell thee, youth, Our souls are parch'd with agonizing thirst, Which must be quench'd tho' death were in the draught: We must have vengeance, for our foes have left No other joy unblighted. Oh! my son, The time is past for such high dreams as thine. Thou know'st not whom we deal with. Knightly faith, And chivalrous honour, are but things whereon They cast disdainful pity. We must meet Falsehood with wiles, and insult with revenge. And, for our names---whate'er the deeds, by which We burst our bondage---is it not enough That in the chronicle of days to come, We, thro' a bright 'For Ever,' shall be call'd The men who saved their country? Many a land Hath bow'd beneath the yoke, and then arisen, As a strong lion rending silken bonds, And on the open field, before high heaven, Won such majestic vengeance, as hath made Its name a power on earth.---Ay, nations own  It is enough of glory to be call'd The children of the mighty, who redeem'd Their native soil---but not by means like these.I have no children.---Of Montalba's blood Not one red drop doth circle thro' the veins Of aught that breathes!---Why, what have I to doWith far futurity?---My spirit lives But in the past.---Away! when thou dost stand On this fair earth, as doth a blasted tree Which the warm sun revives not, then return,Strong in thy desolation: but, till then, Thou art not for our purpose; we have need Of more unshrinking hearts. Montalba, know, I shrink from crime alone. Oh! if my voice Might yet have power amongst you, I would say, Associates, leaders, be avenged! but yetAs knights, as warriors! Peace! have we not borne Th'indelible taint of contumely and chains? We are not knights and warriors.---Our bright crestsHave been defiled and trampled to the earth. Boy! we are slaves---and our revenge shall be Deep as a slave's disgrace. Why, then, farewell:  I leave you to your councils. He that still Would hold his lofty nature undebased, And his name pure, were but a loiterer here.And is it thus indeed?---dost thou forsakeOur cause, my son? Oh, father! what proud hopes This hour hath blighted!---yet, whate'er betide It is a noble privilege to look up Fearless in heaven's bright face---and this is mine, And shall be still.---  He's gone!---Why, let it be! I trust our Sicily hath many a son Valiant as mine.---Associates!---'tis decreed Our foes shall perish. We have but to name The hour, the scene, the signal. It should be In the full city, when some festival Hath gathered throngs, and lull'd infatuate hearts To brief security. Hark! is there not A sound of hurrying footsteps on the breeze? We are betray'd.---Who art thou?Should be thus daring. Lady, lift the veil That shades thy noble brow. Th'affianced bride  Of our lost King! And more, Montalba; know Within this form there dwells a soul as high, As warriors in their battles e'er have proved, Or patriots on the scaffold. Valiant men! I come to ask your aid. Ye see me, one Whose widow'd youth hath all been consecrate To a proud sorrow, and whose life is held In token and memorial of the dead. Say, is it meet that, lingering thus on earth, But to behold one great atonement made, And keep one name from fading in men's hearts, A tyrant's will should force me to profane Heaven's altar with unhallow'd vows---and live Stung by the keen, unutterable scorn Of my own bosom, live---another's bride?Never, oh never!---fear not, noble lady! Worthy of Conradin! Yet hear me still. With his insulting
						eye of cold derision, And, could he pierce the depths where feeling works, Would number e'en our agonies as crimes. ---Say, is this meet? We deem'd these nuptials, lady, Thy willing choice; but 'tis a joy to find Thou art noble still. Fear not; by all our wrongs This shall not be. Vittoria, thou art come  To askKnow, the completion of our
						high designs Requires---a festival; and it must be Thy bridal! Procida!  Nay, start not thus. 'Tis no hard task to bind your raven hair With festal garlands, and to bid the song Rise, and the wine-cup mantle. No---nor yet To meet your suitor at the glittering shrine, Where death, not love, awaits him! Can my soul Dissemble thus? We have no other means Of winning our great birthright back from those Who have usurp'd it, than so lulling them Into vain confidence, that they may deem All wrongs forgot; and this may best be done By what I ask of thee. Then will we mix  With the flush'd revellers, making their gay feast The harvest of the grave. A bridal day! ---Must it be so?---Then, chiefs of Sicily, I bid you to my nuptials! but be there With your bright swords unsheath'd, for thus alone  And let thy banquet Be soon announced, for there are noble men Sentenced to die, for whom we fain would purchase Reprieve with other blood. Be it then the day Preceding that appointed for their doom.My brother, thou shalt live!---Oppression boasts No gift of prophecy!---It but remains To name our signal, chiefs! The Vesper-bell. Even so, the vesper-bell, whose deep-toned peal Is heard o'er land and wave. Part of our band, Wearing the guise of antic revelry, Shall enter, as in some fantastic pageant, The halls of Eribert; and at the hour Devoted to the sword's tremendous task, I follow with the rest.---The vesper-bell! That sound shall wake th'avenger; for 'tis come,  The time when power is in a voice, a breath, To burst the spell which bound us.---But the night Is waning, with her stars, which, one by one, Warn us to part. Friends, to your homes!---your homes ?For our next meeting in
						Palermo's walls. The Vesper-bell! Remember! Fear us not. The Vesper-bell!Speak not of love---it is a word with deep, Strange magic in its melancholy sound, To summon up the dead; and they should rest, At such an hour, forgotten. There are things We must throw from us, when the heart would gather Strength to fulfil its settled purposes: Therefore, no more of love!---But, if to robe This form in bridal ornaments, to smile, (I can smile yet,) at thy gay feast, and stand At th'altar by thy side; if this be deem'd Enough, it shall be done. My fortune's starDoth rule th'ascendant still; ---If not of love, Then pardon, lady, that I speak of joy , And with exulting heart--- There is no joy! ---Who shall look thro' the far futurity, And, as the shadowy visions of events Develope on his gaze, midst their dim throng, Dare, with oracular mien, to point, and say, "This will bring happiness?"---Who shall do this?---Why, thou, and I, and all!---There's One, who sits In his own bright tranquillity enthroned, High o'er all storms, and looking far beyond Their thickest clouds; but we, from whose dull eyes A grain of dust hides the great sun, e'en we Usurp his attributes, and talk, as seers, Of future joy and grief! Thy words are strange. Yet will I hope that peace at length shall settle Upon thy troubled heart, and add soft grace To thy majestic beauty.---Fair Vittoria! I know a day shall come Of peace to all. Ev'n from my darken'd spirit Soon shall each restless wish be exorcised, Which haunts it now, and I shall then lie down Serenely to repose. Of this no more. Command my power, And deem it thus most honour'd. Have I then Soar'd such an eagle-pitch, as to command The mighty Eribert?---And yet 'tis meet; For I bethink me now, I should have worn A crown upon this forehead.---Generous lord! Since thus you give me freedom, know, there is An hour I have loved from childhood, and a sound, Whose tones, o'er earth and ocean sweetly bearing A sense of deep repose, have lull'd me oft To peace---which is forgetfulness: I mean The Vesper-bell. I pray you, let it be The summons to our bridal---Hear you not? To our fair bridal!Lady, let your will Appoint each circumstance. I am but too bless'd Proving my homage thus. Why, then, 'tis mine To rule the glorious fortunes of the day, And I may be content. Yet much remains For thought to brood on, and I would be left Alone with my resolves. Kind Eribert! (Whom I command so absolutely,) now Part we a few brief hours; and doubt not, when I am at thy side once more, but I shall stand There---to the last.Your smiles are troubled, lady; May they ere long be brighter!---Time will seem Slow till the vesper-bell. 'Tis lovers' phrase To say---time lags; and therefore meet for you: But with an equal pace the hours move on, Whether they bear, on their swift silent wing, Pleasure or---fate. Be not so full of thought On such a day.---Behold, the skies themselves Look on my joy with a triumphant smile, Unshadow'd by a cloud. 'Tis very meet That heaven (which loves the just) should wear a smile In honour of his fortunes.---Now, my lord, Forgive me if I say, farewell, until Th'appointed hour. Lady, a brief farewell. And dost thou still refuse to share the glory Of this, our daring enterprize? Oh, father! I too have dreamt of glory, and the word Hath to my soul been as a trumpet's voice, Making my nature sleepless.---But the deeds Whereby 'twas won, the high exploits, whose tale Bids the heart burn, were of another cast Than such as thou requirest. Every deed Hath sanctity, if bearing for its aim The freedom of our country; and the sword Alike is honour'd in the patriot's hand, Searching, midst warrior-hosts, the heart which gave Oppression birth; or flashing thro' the gloom Of the still chamber, o'er its troubled couch, At dead of night.There is no path
						but one For noble natures. Wouldst thou ask the man Who to the earth hath dash'd a nation's chains, Rent as with heaven's own lightning, by what means
					The glorious end was won?---Go, swell th'acclaim! Bid the deliverer, hail! and if his path  To that most bright and sovereign destiny Hath led o'er trampled thousands, be it call'd A stern necessity, and not a crime!Father! my soul yet kindles at the thought Of nobler lessons, in my boyhood learn'd Ev'n from thy voice.---The high remembrances Of other days are stirring in the heart Where thou didst plant them; and they speak of menWho needed no vain sophistry to gild Acts, that would bear heaven's light.---And such be mine! Oh, father! is it yet too late to draw The praise and blessing of all valiant hearts On our most righteous cause? What wouldst thou do? I would go forth, and rouse th'indignant land To generous combat. Why should freedom strike Mantled with darkness?---Is there not more strength E'en in the waving of her single arm Than hosts can wield against her?---I would rouse That spirit, whose fire doth press resistless on To its proud sphere, the stormy field of fight!Ay! and give time and warning to the foe To gather all his might!---It is too late.There is a work to be this eve begun, When rings the vesper-bell; and, long before  To-morrow's sun hath reach'd i'th'noonday heaven His throne of burning glory, every sound Of the Provençal tongue within our walls, As by one thunderstroke---(you are pale, my son)--- Shall be for ever silenced. What! such sounds As falter on the lip of infancy In its imperfect utterance? or are breathed By the fond mother, as she lulls her babe? Or in sweet hymns, upon the twilight air Pour'd by the timid maid?---Must all alike Be still'd in death; and wouldst thou tell my heart There is no crime in this ? Since thou dost feel Such horror of our purpose, in thy power Are means that might avert it. Speak! Oh speak! How would those rescued thousands bless thy name Shouldst thou betray us! Father! I can bear--- Ay, proudly woo---the keenest questioning Of thy soul-gifted eye; which almost seems To claim a part of heaven's dread royalty, ---The power that searches thought! Thou hast a brow  Clear as the day---and yet I doubt thee, Raimond! Whether it be that I have learn'd distrust From a long look thro' man's deep-folded heart; Whether my paths have been so seldom cross'd By honour and fair mercy, that they seem But beautiful deceptions, meeting thus My unaccustom'd gaze;---howe'er it be--- I doubt thee!---See thou waver not---take heed! Time lifts the veil from all things!  And 'tis thus Youth fades from off our spirit; and the robes Of beauty and of majesty, wherewith We clothed our idols, drop!---O! bitter day, When, at the crushing of our glorious world, We start, and find men thus!---Yet be it so! Is not my soul still powerful, in itself
					To realize its dreams?---Ay, shrinking not From the pure eye of heaven, my brow may well Undaunted meet my father's.---But, away! Mightier than
						vengeance. There was a time when my thoughts wander'd not Beyond these fairy scenes; when, but to catch The languid fragrance of the southern breeze From the rich-flowering citrons, or to rest, Dreaming of some wild legend, in the shade Of the dark laurel-foliage, was enough Of happiness.---How have these calm delights Fled from before one passion, as the dews, The delicate gems of morning, are exhaled By the great sun!  Raimond! oh! now thou'rt come I read it in thy look, to say farewell For the last time---the last! No, best beloved! I come to tell thee there is now no power To part us---but in death. I have dreamt of joy, But never aught like this.---Speak yet again! Say, we shall part no more! No more, if love Can strive with darker spirits, and he is strong In his immortal nature! all is changed Since last we met. My father---keep the tale Secret from all, and most of all, my Constance,  From Eribert---my father is return'd: I leave thee not. Thy father! blessed sound! Good angels be his guard!---Oh! if he knew How my soul clings to thine, he could not hate Even a Provençal maid!---Thy father!---now Thy soul will be at peace, and I shall see The sunny happiness of earlier days Look from thy brow once more!---But how is this? Thine eye reflects not the glad soul of mine; And in thy look is that which ill befits A tale of joy. A dream is on my soul. I see a slumberer, crown'd with flowers, and smiling As in delighted visions, on the brink Of a dread chasm; and this strange phantasy Hath cast so deep a shadow o'er my thoughts, I cannot but be sad. Why, let me sing One of the sweet wild strains you love so well, And this will banish it. It may not be. Oh! gentle Constance, go not forth to-day: Such dreams are ominous. Have you then forgot  My brother's nuptial feast?---I must be one Of the gay train attending to the shrine His stately bride. In sooth, my step of joy Will print earth lightly now---What fear'st thou, love? Look all around! these blue transparent skies, And sun-beams pouring a more buoyant life Thro' each glad thrilling vein, will brightly chase All thought of evil.---Why, the very air Breathes of delight!---Thro' all its glowing realms Doth music blend with fragance, and e'en here The city's voice of jubilee is heard Till each light leaf seems trembling unto sounds Of human joy! There lie far deeper things,--- Things, that may darken thought for life, beneath That city's festive semblance.---I have pass'd Thro' the glad multitudes, and I have mark'd A stern intelligence in meeting eyes, Which deem'd their flash unnoticed, and a quick, Suspicious vigilance, too intent to clothe Its mien with carelessness; and, now and then, A hurrying start, a whisper, or a hand Pointing by stealth to some one, singled out Amidst the reckless throng. O'er all is spread A mantling flush of revelry, which may hide  Much from unpractised eyes; but lighter signs Have been prophetic oft. I tremble!---Raimond! What may these things portend? It was a day Of festival, like this; the city sent Up thro' her sunny firmament a voice Joyous as now; when, scarcely heralded By one deep moan, forth from his cavernous depths The earthquake burst; and the wide splendid scene Became one chaos of all fearful things, Till the brain whirl'd, partaking the sick motion Of rocking palaces. And then didst thou, My noble Raimond! thro' the dreadful paths Laid open by destruction, past the chasms, Whose fathomless clefts, a moment's work, had given One burial unto thousands, rush to save Thy trembling Constance! she who lives to bless Thy generous love, that still the breath of heaven Wafts gladness to her soul! Heaven!---Heaven is just! And being so, must guard thee, sweet one, still. Trust none beside.---Oh! the omnipotent skies Make their wrath manifest, but insidious man
					 Doth compass those he hates withWherein lies fate. Know, danger walks abroad, Mask'd as a reveller. Constance! oh! by all Our tried affection; all the vows which bind Our hearts together, meet me in these bowers, Here, I adjure thee, meet me, when the bell Doth sound for vesper-prayer! And know'st thou not 'Twill be the bridal hour? It will not, love! That hour will bring no bridal!---Nought of this To human ear; but speed thou hither, fly, When evening brings that signal.---Dost thou heed? This is no meeting, by a lover sought To breathe fond tales, and make the twilight groves And stars, attest his vows; deem thou not so, Therefore denying it!---I tell thee, Constance! If thou woulds't save me from such fierce despair As falls on man, beholding all he loves Perish before him, while his strength can but Strive with his agony---thou'lt meet me then? Look on me, love!---I am not oft so moved--- Thou'lt meet me?Oh! what mean thy words?---If then My steps are free,---I will. Be thou but calm. Be calm!---there is a cold and sullen calm, And, were my wild fears made realities, It might be mine; but, in this dread suspense, This conflict of all terrible phantasies, There is no calm.---Yet fear thou not, dear love! I will watch o'er thee still. And now, farewell Until that hour! My Raimond, fare thee well. Said'st thou this night? This very night---and lo! E'en now the sun declines. What! are they arm'd? All arm'd, and strong in vengeance and despair.Doubtful and strange the tale! Why was not this Reveal'd before? Mistrust me not, my lord! That stern and jealous Procida hath kept O'er all my steps, (as though he did suspect The purposes, which oft his eye hath sought To read in mine,) a watch so vigilant, I knew not how to warn thee, tho' for this Alone I mingled with his bands, to learn Their projects and their strength. Thou know'st my faith To Anjou's house full well. How may we now Avert the gathering storm?---The viceroy holds His bridal feast, and all is revelry. ---'Twas a true-boding heaviness of heart Which kept me from these nuptials. Thou thyself Mayst yet escape, and, haply of thy bands Rescue a part, ere long to wreak full vengeance  Upon these rebels. 'Tis too late to dream Of saving Eribert. E'en shouldst thou rush Before him with the tidings, in his pride And confidence of soul, he would but laugh Thy tale to scorn. He must not die unwarn'd, Tho' it be all in vain. But thou, Alberti, Rejoin thy comrades, lest thine absence wake Suspicion in their hearts. Thou hast done well, And shalt not pass unguerdon'd, should I live Thro' the deep horrors of th'approaching night.Noble De Couci, trust me still. Anjou Commands no heart more faithful than Alberti's. The grovelling slave!---And yet he spoke too true! For Eribert, in blind elated joy, Will scorn the warning voice.---The day wanes fast, And thro' the city, recklessly dispersed, Unarm'd and unprepared, my soldiers revel, E'en on the brink of fate.---I must away. Joy be to this fair meeting!---Who hath seen The viceroy's bride? I saw her, as she pass'd The gazing throngs assembled in the city. 'Tis said she hath not left for years, till now, Her castle's wood-girt solitude. 'Twill gall These proud Sicilians, that her wide domains Should be the conqueror's guerdon. 'Twas their boast With what fond faith she worshipp'd still the name Of the boy, Conradin. How will the slaves Brook this new triumph of their lords? In sooth It stings them to the quick. In the full streets They mix with our Provençals, and assume A guise of mirth, but it sits hardly on them. 'Twere worth a thousand festivals, to see With what a bitter and unnatural effort They strive to smile! Is this Vittoria fair? Of a most noble mien; but yet her beauty Is wild and awful, and her large dark eye, In its unsettled glances, hath strange power, From which thou'lt shrink, as I did. Hush! they come. Welcome, my noble friends!---there must not lower One clouded brow to-day in Sicily! Behold my bride! Receive our homage, lady! I bid all welcome. May the feast we offer Prove worthy of such guests! Look on her, friends! And say, if that majestic brow is not Meet for a diadem? 'Tis well, my lord! When memory's pictures fade, 'tis kindly done To brighten their dimm'd hues! Mark'd you her
						glance? What eloquent scorn
						was there! yet he, th'elate Of heart, perceives it not. Now to the feast! Constance, you look not joyous. I have said That all should smile to-day. Forgive me, brother! The heart is wayward, and its garb of pomp At times oppresses it. Why, how is this? Voices of woe, and prayers of agony Unto my soul have risen, and left sad sounds  There echoing still. Yet would I fain be gay, Since 'tis your wish.---In truth, I should have been A village-maid! But, being as you are, Not thus ignobly free, command your looks, (They may be taught obedience,) to reflect The aspect of the time. And know, fair maid! That if in this unskill'd, you stand alone Amidst our court of pleasure. To the feast! Now let the red wine foam!---There should be mirth When conquerors revel!---Lords of this fair isle! Your good sword's heritage, crown each bowl, and pledge The present and the future! for they both Look brightly on us. Dost thou smile, my bride?Yes, Eribert!---thy prophecies of joy Have taught e'en me to smile. 'Tis well. To-day  I have won a fair and almostTo-morrow---let the bright sun speed his course, To waft me happiness!---my proudest foes Must die---and then my slumber shall be laid On rose-leaves, with no envious fold, to mar The luxury of its visions!---Fair Vittoria,  Your looks are troubled!  It is strange, but oft, Midst festal songs and garlands, o'er my soul Death comes, with some dull image! as you spoke Of those whose blood is claim'd, I thought for them Who, in a darkness thicker than the night E'er wove with all her clouds, have pined so long: How blessed were the stroke which makes them things Of that invisible world, wherein, we trust, There is, at least, no bondage!---But should we
					From such a scene as this, where all earth's joys Contend for mastery, and the very sense Of life is rapture; should we pass, I say,At once from such excitements to the void And silent gloom of that which doth await us--- ---Were it not dreadful? Banish such dark thoughts! They ill beseem the hour. There is no hour Of this mysterious world, in joy or woe, But they beseem it well!---Why, what a slight, Impalpable bound is that, th'unseen, which severs Being from death!---And who can tell how near Its misty brink he stands? What mean her words?
					 There's some dark mystery here.  No more of this! Pour the bright juice which Etna's glowing vines Yield to the conquerors! And let music's voice Dispel these ominous dreams!---Wake, harp and song! Swell out your triumph! Pardon, my good lord! But this demands--- What means thy breathless haste? And that ill-boding mien?---Away! such looks Befit not hours like these. The Lord De Couci Bade me bear this, and say, 'tis fraught with tidings Of life and death.Is this a time for
						ought But revelry?---My lord, these dull intrusions Mar the bright spirit of the festal scene!Hence! tell
						the Lord De Couci we will talk Of life and death to-morrow.  Let there be Around me none but joyous looks to-day, And strains whose very echoes wake to mirth!What forms are these?---What means this antic triumph?'Tis but a rustic pageant, by my vassals Prepared to grace our bridal. Will you not  Hear their wild music? Our Sicilian vales Have many a sweet and mirthful melody, To which the glad heart bounds.---Breathe ye some strain Meet for the time, ye sons of Sicily!In her sunset
						robe, looks bright, And the purple hills of Sicily, With their vineyards, laugh in light; From the marble cities of her plains Glad voices mingling swell; ---But with yet more loud and lofty strains, They shall hail the Vesper-bell!Oh! sweet its tones, when the summer breeze Their cadence wafts afar, To float o'er the blue Sicilian seas, As they gleam to the first pale star! The shepherd greets them on his height, The hermit in his cell; ---But a deeper power shall breathe, to-night, In the sound of the Vesper-bell!---It is the hour!---Hark, hark!---my bride, our summons! The altar is prepared and crown'd with flowers That wait--- The victim!  Strike! the hour is come!  Welcome, avengers, welcome! Now, be strong! Now hath fate reached thee in thy mid career, Thou reveller in a nation's agonies!My brother!
						oh! my brother! Have I stood A leader in the battle-fields of kings, To perish thus at last?---Ay, by these pangs, And this strange chill, that heavily doth creep, Like a slow poison, thro' my curdling veins, This should be---death!---In sooth a dull exchange For the gay bridal feast!Remember
						Conradin!---spare none, spare none!This is proud freedom! Now my soul may cast, In generous scorn, her mantle of dissembling To earth for ever!---And it is such joy, As if a captive, from his dull, cold cell, Might soar at once on charter'd wing to range The realms of starr'd infinity!---Away! Vain mockery of a bridal wreath! The hour For which stern patience ne'er kept watch in vain Is come; and I may give my bursting heart Full and indignant scope.---Now, Eribert! Believe in retribution! What, proud man! Prince, ruler, conqueror! didst thou deem heaven slept? "Or that the unseen, immortal ministers,  "Ranging the world, to note e'en purposed crime "In burning characters, had laid aside "Their everlasting attributes for thee ?"---Oh! blind security!---He, in whose dread hand The lightnings vibrate, holds them back, until The trampler of this goodly earth hath reach'd His pyramid-height of power; that so his fall May, with more fearful oracles, make pale Man's crown'd oppressors! Oh! reproach him not! His soul is trembling on the dizzy brink Of that dim world where passion may not enter. Leave him in peace!Anjou, Anjou!---De
						Couci to the rescue!My brave
						Provençals! do ye combat still? And I, your chief, am here!---Now, now I feel That death indeed is bitter! Fare thee well! Thine eyes so oft, with their insulting smile, Have looked on man's last pangs, thou shouldst, by this, Be perfect how to die!  Away, my Constance! Now is the time for flight. Our slaughtering bands Are scatter'd far and wide. A little while And thou shalt be in safety. Know'st thou not  That low sweet vale, where dwells the holy man, Anselmo? He whose hermitage is rear'd 'Mid some old temple's ruins?---Round the spot His name hath spread so pure and deep a charm, 'Tis hallow'd as a sanctuary, wherein Thou shalt securely bide, till this wild storm Have spent its fury. Haste! I will not fly! While in his heart there is one throb of life, One spark in his dim eyes, I will not leave The brother of my youth to perish thus, Without one kindly bosom to sustain His dying head. The clouds are darkening round. There are strange voices ringing in mine ear That summon me---to what?---But I have been Used to command!---Away! I will not die But on the field---Oh heaven! be
						merciful, As thou art just!---for he is now where nought But mercy can avail him!---It is past!I've sought thee
						long---Why art thou lingering here? Haste, follow me!---Suspicion with thy name Joins that word--- Traitor ! Traitor!---Guido?  Yes! Hast thou not heard that, with his men-at-arms, After vain conflict with a people's wrath, De Couci hath escaped?---And there are those Who murmur that from thee the warning cameWhich saved him from our vengeance. But e'en yet In the red current of Provençal blood That doubt may be effaced. Draw thy good sword, And follow me!And thou couldst doubt me, Guido!'Tis come to this!---Away! mistrust me still. I will not stain my sword with deeds like thine. Thou know'st me not! Raimond di Procida! If thou art he whom once I deemed so noble--- Call me thy friend no more! Rise, dearest,
						rise! Thy duty's task hath nobly been fulfill'd, E'en in the face of death; but all is o'er, And this is now no place where nature's tears In quiet sanctity may freely flow. ---Hark! the wild sounds that wait on fearful deeds Are swelling on the winds, as the deep roar Of fast-advancing billows; and for thee
					I shame not thus to tremble.---Speed, oh, speed!'Tis strange he comes not!---Is not this the still And sultry hour of noon?---He should have been Here by the day-break.---Was there not a voice? ---"No! 'tis the shrill Cicada, with glad life "Peopling these marble ruins, as it sports "Amidst them, in the sun.---Hark! yet again!" No! no!---Forgive me, father! that I bring Earth's restless griefs and passions to disturb The stillness of thy holy solitude; My heart is full of care. There is no place So hallow'd, as to be unvisited By mortal cares. Nay, whither should we go, With our deep griefs and passions, but to scenes Lonely and still; where he that made our hearts Will speak to them in whispers? I have known Affliction too, my daughter. Hark! his step! I know it well---he comes---my Raimond, welcome! Oh heaven! that aspect tells a fearful tale.There is
						a cloud of horror on my soul; And on thy words, Anselmo, peace doth wait, Even as an echo, following the sweet close Of some divine and solemn harmony:  Therefore I sought thee now. Oh! speak to me Of holy things, and names, in whose deep sound Is power to bid the tempests of the heart Sink, like a storm rebuked. What recent grief Darkens thy spirit thus? I said not grief. We should rejoice to-day, but joy is not That which it hath been. In the flowers which wreathe Its mantling cup there is a scent unknown, Fraught with some strange delirium. All things now Have changed their nature; still, I say, rejoice! There is a cause, Anselmo!---We are free, Free and avenged!---Yet on my soul there hangs A darkness, heavy as th'oppressive gloom Of midnight phantasies.---Ay, for this, too, There is a cause. How say'st thou, we are free? There may have raged, within Palermo's walls, Some brief wild tumult, but too well I know They call the stranger, lord.Who calls the dead
					Conqueror or lord?---Hush! breathe it not aloud, The wild winds must not hear it!---Yet, again, I tell thee, we are free! Thine eye hath look'd On fearful deeds, for still their shadows hang O'er its dark orb.---Speak! I adjure thee, say, How hath this work been wrought? Peace! ask me not!  Why shouldstBack on its fount?---We cannot
						wake them now The storm is in my soul, but they are allAt rest!---Ay, sweetly may the slaughter'd babe By its dead mother sleep; and warlike men Who, midst the slain have slumber'd oft before, Making the shield their pillow, may repose Well, now their toils are done.---Is't not enough?Merciful heaven! have such things been? And yet There is no shade come o'er the laughing sky! ---I am an outcast now. O Thou, whose ways Clouds mantle fearfully; of all the blind, But terrible, ministers that work thy wrath, How much is man the fiercest!---Others knowTheir limits---Yes! the earthquakes, and the storms, And the volcanoes!---He alone o'erleaps The bounds of retribution!---Couldst thou gaze, Vittoria! with thy woman's heart and eye, On such dread scenes unmoved?Was it for me
					To stay th'avenging sword?---No, tho' it pierced My very soul?---"Hark, hark, what thrilling shrieks "Ring thro' the air around me!---Can'st thou not "Bid them be hush'd?---Oh! look not on me thus!"Lady! thy thoughts lend sternness to the looks "Which are but sad!"---Have all then perish'd? all ?Was there no mercy? Mercy! it hath been A word forbidden as th'unhallowed names Of evil powers.---Yet one there was who dared To own the guilt of pity, and to aid The victims; but in vain.---Of him no more! He is a traitor, and a traitor's death Will be his meed.Oh Heaven!---his
						name, his name? Is it---it cannot be!If Raimond too must die?---It is as sure As that his blood is on thy head, for thouDidst win him to this treason. "When did man  "Call mercy,"My noble Raimond! Maiden!" he must die. E'en now the youth before his judges stands, And they are men who, to the voice of prayer, Are as the rock is to the murmur'd sigh Of summer-waves; ay, tho' a father sit On their tribunal. Bend thou not to me. What would'st thou? Mercy!---Oh! wert thou to plead But with a look, e'en yet he might be saved! If thou hast ever loved--- ---If I have loved?  It isI am what it hath made me.---O'er
						my soul  Lightning hath pass'd, and sear'd it. Could I weep, I then might pity---but it will not be.Oh! thou wilt yet relent, for woman's heart Was formed to suffer and to melt. Away! Why should I pity thee?---Thou wilt but prove What I have known before---and yet I live! Nature is strong, and it may all be borne--- The sick impatient yearning of the heart For that which is not; and the weary sense Of the dull void, wherewith our homes have been Circled by death; yes, all things may be borne! All, save remorse.---But I will not bow down My spirit to that dark power:---thereAnselmo! wherefore didst thou talk of guilt?Ay, thus doth sensitive conscience quicken thought, Lending reproachful voices to a breeze, Keen lightning to a look. Leave me in peace! Is't not enough that I should have a sense Of things thou canst not see, all wild and dark, And of unearthly whispers, haunting me With dread suggestions, but that thy cold words,Old man, should gall me too?---Must all conspire Against me?---Oh! thou beautiful spirit! wont  To shine upon my dreams with looks of love,  Where artOf thee which urged me to
						the fearful task, And wilt thou now forsake me?---I must seek The shadowy woods again, for there, perchance, Still may thy voice be in my twilight-paths; ---Here I but meet despair! Despair not
							thou ,My daughter!---he that purifies the heart With grief, will lend it strength.
						Did she not say That some one was to die? I tell thee not Thy pangs are vain---for nature will have way. Earth must have tears; yet in a heart like thine, Faith may not yield its place. Have I not heard Some fearful tale?---Who said, that there should rest Blood on my soul?---What blood?---I never bore Hatred, kind father, unto aught that breathes; Raimond doth know it well.---Raimond!---High heaven, It bursts upon me now!---and he must die! For my sake---e'en for mine! Her words were strange, And her proud mind seem'd half to frenzy wrought---  ---Perchance this may not be. It must not be.Why do I linger here? Where wouldst thou go? To give their stern and unrelenting hearts A victim in his stead. Stay! wouldst thou rush On certain death? I may not falter now. ---Is not the life of woman all bound up In her affections?---What hath she to doIn this bleak world alone?---It may be well For man on his triumphal course to move, Uncumber'd by soft bonds; butFor love and grief. Thou fair and gentle thing, Unused to meet a glance which doth not speak Of tenderness or homage! how shouldst thou
					Bear the hard aspect of unpitying men, Or face the king of terrors? There is strength Deep bedded in our hearts, of which we reck But little, till the shafts of heaven have pierced Its fragile dwelling.---Must not earth be rent Before her gems are found?---Oh! now I feel  Worthy the generous love which hath not shunn'd To look on death for me!---My heart hath given Birth to as deep a courage, and a faith As high in its devotion.  She is gone! Is it to perish?---God of mercy! lend Power to my voice, that so its prayer may save This pure and lofty creature!---I will follow--- But her young footstep and heroic heart Will bear her to destruction faster far Than I can track her path. The morn lower'd darkly, but the sun hath now, With fierce and angry splendour, thro' the clouds Burst forth, as if impatient to behold This, our high triumph.---Lead the prisoner in. Why, what a bright and fearless brow is here! ---Is this man guilty?---Look on him, Montalba!Be firm. Should justice falter at a look?No, thou say'st well. Her eyes are filletted, Or should be so. Thou, that dost call thyself--- ---But no! I will not breathe a traitor's name--- Speak! thou art arraign'd of treason. I arraign In the bright face of
						heaven; and your own hearts Give echo to the charge. Your very looks Have ta'en the stamp of crime, and seem to shrink, With a perturb'd and haggard wildness, back From the too-searching light.---Why, what hath wrought This change on noble brows?---There is a voice, With a deep answer, rising from the blood Your hands have coldly shed!---Ye are of those From whom just men recoil, with curdling veins, All thrill'd by life's abhorrent consciousness, And sensitive feeling of a murderer's presence. ---Away! come down from your tribunal-seat, Put off your robes of state, and let your mien Be pale and humbled; for ye bear about you That which repugnant earth doth sicken at, More than the pestilence.---That I should live To see my father shrink! Montalba, speak! There's something chokes my voice---but fear me not.If we must plead to vindicate our acts, Be it when thou hast made thine own look clear; Most eloquent youth! What answer canst thou make To this our charge of treason? I will plead Where mercy is not
						guilt. But here, I feel Too buoyantly the glory and the joy Of my free spirit's whiteness; for e'en now Th'embodied hideousness of crime doth seem Before me glaring out.---Why, I saw thee ,Thy foot upon an aged warrior's breast, Trampling our nature's last convulsive heavings. ---And thou--- thy sword---Oh, valiant chief!---is yetRed from the noble stroke which pierced, at once, A mother and the babe, whose little life Was from her bosom drawn!---Immortal deeds  For bards to hymn!  I look upon his mien, And waver.---Can it be?---My boyish heart Deem'd him so noble once!---Away, weak thoughts! Why should I shrink, as if the guilt were mine ,From his proud glance? Oh, thou dissembler!---thou, So skill'd to clothe with virtue's generous flush The hollow cheek of cold hypocrisy, That, with thy guilt made manifest, I can scarce Believe thee guilty!---look on me, and say Whose was the secret warning voice, that saved De Couci with his bands, to join our foes, And forge new fetters for th'indignant land? Whose was this treachery?Who hath promised here, (Belike to appease the manès of the dead,) At midnight to unfold Palermo's gates, And welcome in the foe?---Who hath done this, But thou, a tyrant's friend? Who hath done this? Father!---if I may call thee by that name--- Look, with thy piercing eye, on those whose smiles Were masks that hid their daggers.--- There , perchance,May lurk what loves not light too strong. For me,  I know but this---there needs no deep research To prove the truth---that murderers may be traitors Ev'n to each other.His unaltering
						cheek Still vividly doth hold its natural hue, And his eye quails not;---Is this innocence?No! 'tis th'unshrinking hardihood of crime. ---Thou bear'st a gallant mien!---But where is she Whom thou hast barter'd fame and life to save, The fair Provençal maid?---What! know'st thou not That this alone were guilt, to death allied? Was't not our law that he who spared a foe, (And is she not of that detested race?) Should thenceforth be amongst us as a foe?---Where hast thou borne her?---speak! That heaven, whose eye Burns up thy soul with its far-searching glance, Is with her; she is safe. And by that word Thy doom is seal'd.---Oh God! that I had died Before this bitter hour, in the full strength And glory of my heart! Oh! art thou found?  ---But yet, to find thee thus!---Chains, chains forMy brave, my noble love!---Off with these bonds;  Let him be free as air:---for I am come To be your victim now. Death has no pang More keen than this.---Oh! wherefore art thou here? I could have died so calmly, deeming thee Saved, and at peace. At peace!---And thou hast thought Thus poorly of my love!---But woman's breast Hath strength to suffer too.---Thy father sits On this tribunal; Raimond, which is he?My father!---who hath lull'd thy gentle heart With that false hope?---Beloved! gaze around--- See, if thine eye can trace a father's soul In the dark looks bent on us. Thou art he! Nay, turn thou not away!---for I beheld Thy proud lip quiver, and a watery mist Pass o'er thy troubled eye; and then I knew Thou wert his father!---Spare him!---take my life!In truth a worthless sacrifice for his, But yet mine all.---Oh! he hath still to runA long bright race of glory. Constance, peace! I look upon thee, and my failing heart Is as a broken reed. Oh,
						yet relent!  If 'twas his crime to rescueI come to be the atonement! Let him live To crown thine age with honour.---In thy heart There's a deep conflict; but great nature pleads With an o'ermastering voice, and thou wilt yield! ---Thou art his father!Maiden, thou'rt
						deceived! I am as calm as that dead pause of nature Ere the full thunder bursts.---A judge is not Father or friend. Who calls this man my son? --- My son!---Ay! thus his mother proudly smiled---But she was noble!---Traitors stand alone, Loosed from all ties.---Why should I trifle thus? ---Bear her away! And whither?
					 Unto death. Why should she live when all her race have perish'd?Raimond, farewell!---Oh! when thy star hath risen To its bright noon, forget not, best beloved, I died for thee! High heaven! thou seest these things; And yet endur'st them!---Shalt thou die for me, Purest and loveliest being?---but our fate May not divide us long.---Her cheek is cold---  Her deep blue eyes are closed---Should this be death! ---If thus, there yet were mercy!---Father, father! Is thy heart human? Bear her hence, I say! Why must my soul be torn? Now, by this sign Of heaven's prevailing love, ye shall not harm One ringlet of her head.---How! is there not Enough of blood upon your burthen'd souls? Will not the visions of your midnight couch Be wild and dark enough, but ye must heap Crime upon crime?---Be ye content:---your dreams, Your councils, and your banquettings, will yet Be haunted by the voice which doth not sleep, E'en tho' this maid be spared!---Constance, look up! Thou shalt not die. Oh! death e'en now hath veil'd The light of her soft beauty.---Wake, my love; Wake at my voice! Anselmo, lead her hence, And let her live, but never meet my sight. ---Begone!---My heart will burst. One last embrace! ---Again life's rose is opening on her cheek; Yet must we part.---So love is crush'd on earth!  But there are brighter worlds!---Farewell, farewell! There was a voice which call'd me.---Am I not A spirit freed from earth?---Have I not pass'd The bitterness of death? Oh, haste away! Yes! Raimond calls me.---He too is released From his cold bondage.---We are free at last, And all is well---Away! The pang is o'er, And I have but to die. Now, Procida, Comes thy great task. Wake! summon to thine aid All thy deep soul's commanding energies; For thou---a chief among us---must pronounce The sentence of thy son. It rests with thee.Ha! ha!---Men's hearts should be of softer mould Than in the elder time.---Fathers could doom Their children then with an unfaltering voice,And we must tremble thus!---Is it not said, That nature grows degenerate, earth being now So full of days? Rouse up thy mighty heart. Ay, thou say'st right. There yet are souls which tower As landmarks to mankind.---Well, what's the task? ---There is a man to be condemn'd, you say?  Is he then guilty?  Thus we deem of him With one accord. And hath he nought to plead? Nought but a soul unstain'd. Why, that is little. Stains on the soul are but as conscience deems them, And conscience---may be sear'd.---But, for this sentence! ---Was't not the penalty imposed on man, E'en from creation's dawn, that he must die? ---It was: thus making guilt a sacrifice Unto eternal justice; and we but Obey heaven's mandate, when we cast dark souls To th'elements from amongst us.---Be it so! Such be his doom!---I have said. Ay, now my heartIs girt with adamant, whose cold weight doth press Its gaspings down.---Off! let me breathe in freedom! ---Mountains are on my breast! Guards, bear the prisoner Back to his dungeon. Father! oh, look up; Thou art my father still! Oh! Raimond, Raimond! If it should be that I have wrong'd thee, say Thou dost forgive me. Friend of my young days, So may all-pitying heaven! Whose voice was that? Where is he?---gone?---now I may breathe once more In the free air of heaven. Let us away.The morning breaks; his time is almost come: Will he be led this way? Ay, so 'tis said, To die before that gate thro' which he purposed The foe should enter in. 'Twas a vile plot! And yet I would my hands were pure as his From the deep stain of blood. Didst hear the sounds I'th'air last night? Since the great work of slaughter, Who hath not heard them duly, at those hours Which should be silent? Oh! the fearful mingling, The terrible mimicry of human voices, In every sound which to the heart doth speak Of woe and death. Ay, there was woman's shrill And piercing cry; and the low feeble wail Of dying infants; and the half-suppress'd Deep groan of man in his last agonies! And now and then there swell'd upon the breeze Strange, savage bursts of laughter, wilder far Than all the rest. Of our own fate, perchance  These awful midnight wailings may be deem'd An ominous prophecy.---Should France regain Her power amongst us, doubt not, we shall have Stern reckoners to account with.---Hark! 'Twas but A rushing of the breeze. E'en now, 'tis said, The hostile bands approach. Again!---that sound Was no illusion. Nearer yet it swells--- They come, they come! The foe is at your gates; But hearts and hands prepared shall meet his onset: Why are ye loitering here? My lord, we came--- Think ye I know not wherefore?---'twas to see A fellow-being die!---Ay, 'tis a sight Man loves to look on, and the tenderest hearts Recoil, and yet withdraw not, from the scene. For this ye came---What! is our nature fierce,Or is there that in mortal agony, From which the soul, exulting in its strength, Doth learn immortal lessons?---Hence, and arm! Ere the night dews descend, ye will have seen Enough of death; for this must be a day  Of battle!---'Tis the hour which troubled souls Delight in, for its rushing storms are wings Which bear them up!---Arm, arm! 'tis for your homes, And all that lends them loveliness---Away!And Constance then is safe!---Heaven bless thee, father; Good angels bear such comfort. I have found A safe asylum for thine honour'd love, Where she may dwell until serener days, With Saint Rosolia's gentlest daughters; those Whose hallow'd office is to tend the bed Of pain and death, and soothe the parting soul With their soft hymns: and therefore are they call'd "Sisters of Mercy." Oh! that name, my Constance, Befits thee well! E'en in our happiest days, There was a depth of tender pensiveness, Far in thine eyes' dark azure, speaking ever Of pity and mild grief.---Is she at peace?Alas! what should I say, Why did I ask? Knowing the deep and full devotedness Of her young heart's affections?---Oh! the thought Of my untimely fate will haunt her dreams, Which should have been so tranquil!---And her soul, Whose strength was but the lofty gift of love, Even unto death will sicken. All that faith  Can yield of comfort, shall assuage her woes; And still, whate'er betide, the light of heaven Rests on her gentle heart. But thou, my son! Is thy young spirit master'd, and prepared For nature's fearful and mysterious change?Ay, father! of my brief remaining task The least part is to die?---And yet the cup Of life still mantled brightly to my lips, Crown'd with that sparkling bubble, whose proud name Is---glory!---Oh! my soul, from boyhood's morn, Hath nursed such mighty dreams!---It was my hope To leave a name, whose echo, from the abyss Of time should rise, and float upon the winds, Into the far hereafter: there to be A trumpet-sound, a voice from the deep tomb, Murmuring---awake!---Arise!---But this is past! Erewhile, and it had seem'd enough of shame, To sleep forgotten in the dust---but now---Oh God!---the undying record of my grave Will be,---Here sleeps a traitor!---One, whose crime Was---to deem brave men might find nobler weapons Than the cold murderer's dagger! Oh, my son, Subdue these troubled thoughts! Thou wouldst not change Thy lot for theirs, o'er whose dark dreams will hang  The avenging shadows, which the blood-stain'd soul Doth conjure from the death! Thou'rt right. I would not. Yet 'tis a weary task to school the heart, Ere years or griefs have tamed its fiery spirit Into that still and passive fortitude, Which is but learn'd from suffering.---Would the hour To hush these passionate throbbings were at hand!It will not be to-day. Hast thou not heard--- ---But no---the rush, the trampling, and the stir Of this great city, arming in her haste, Pierce not these dungeon-depths.---The foe hath reach'd Our gates, and all Palermo's youth, and all Her warrior-men, are marshall'd, and gone forth In that high hope which makes realities, To the red field. Thy father leads them on.They are gone
						forth! my father leads them on! All, all Palermo's youth!---No! one is left,Shut out from glory's race!---They are gone forth! ---Ay! now the soul of battle is abroad, It burns upon the air!---The joyous winds Are tossing warrior-plumes, the proud white foam Of battle's roaring billows!---On my sight The vision bursts---it maddens! 'tis the flash, The lightning-shock of lances, and the cloud  Of rushing arrows, and the broad full blaze Of helmets in the sun!---The very steed With his majestic rider glorying shares The hour's stern joy, and waves his floating mane As a triumphant banner!---Such things are Even now---and I am here! Alas. be calm! To the same grave ye press,---thou that dost pine Beneath a weight of chains, and they that rule The fortunes of the fight.Ay! Thou canst feelThe calm thou wouldst impart, for unto thee All men alike, the warrior and the slave, Seem, as thou say'st, but pilgrims, pressing on To the same bourne.---Yet call it not the same! As altars to
						their country, visited By fathers with their children, bearing wreaths, And chaunting hymns in honour of the dead: Will mine be such? Anselmo! art thou found? Haste, haste, or all is lost! Perchance thy voice, Whereby they deem heaven speaks, thy lifted cross, And prophet-mien, may stay the fugitives, Or shame them back to die. The fugitives! What words are these?---the sons of Sicily Fly not before the foe? That I should say It is too true! And thou---thou bleedest, lady! Peace! heed not me, when Sicily is lost! I stood upon the walls, and watched our bands, As, with their ancient, royal banner spread, Onward they march'd. The combat was begun. The fiery impulse given, and valiant men Had seal'd their freedom with their blood---when lo! That false Alberti led his recreant vassals To join th'invader's host. His country's curse Rest on the slave for ever! Then distrust E'en of their nobler leaders, and dismay, That swift contagion, on Palermo's bands Came, like a deadly blight. They fled!---Oh shame! E'en now they fly!---Ay, thro' the city gates They rush, as if all Etna's burning streams Pursued their winged steps! Thou hast not named  Their chief---Di Procida--- No! like a kingly lion in the toils, Daring the hunters yet, he proudly strives But all in vain! The few that breast the storm, With Guido and Montalba, by his side, Fight but for graves upon the battle-field.And I am here !---Shall there be power, O God!In the roused energies of fierce despair, To burst my heart---and not to rend my chains? Oh, for one moment of the thunderbolt To set the strong man free!Why, 'twere a deed Worthy the fame and blessing of all time, To loose thy bonds, thou son of Procida! Thou art no traitor:---from thy kindled brow Looks out thy lofty soul!---Arise! go forth! And rouse the noble heart of Sicily Unto high deeds again. Anselmo, haste; Unbind him! Let my spirit still prevail, Ere I depart---for the strong hand of death Is on me now.--- Oh heaven! the life-blood streams Fast from thy heart---thy troubled eyes grow dim. Who hath done this? Before the gates I stood, And in the name of him, the loved and lost,  With whom I soon shall be, all vainly strove To stay the shameful flight. Then from the foe, Fraught with my summons to his viewless home, Came the fleet shaft which pierced me. Yet, oh yet, It may not be too late. Help, help! Away! Bright is the hour which brings me liberty! Haste, be those fetters riven!---Unbar the gates, And set the captive free! Know ye not her
					Who should have worn your country's diadem?Oh, lady, we obey. Is this no dream? ---Mount, eagle! thou art free!---Shall I then die, Not midst the mockery of insulting crowds, But on the field of banners, where the brave Are striving for an immortality? ---It is e'en so!---Now for bright arms of proof, A helm, a keen-edged falchion, and e'en yet My father may be saved! Away, be strong! And let thy battle-word, to rule the storm, Be--- Conradin ! Oh! for one hour of life  To hear that name blent with th'exulting shout Of victory!---'twill not be!---A mightier power Doth summon me away. To purer worlds Raise thy last thoughts in hope.Yes! he is there,All glorious in his beauty!---Conradin! Death parted us---and death shall re-unite! ---He will not stay---it is all darkness now; Night gathers o'er my spirit. She is gone It is an awful hour which stills the heart That beat so proudly once.---Have mercy, heaven!Montjoy! Montjoy! St.
						Denis for Anjou! Provençals, on! Fly, fly, or all is lost! Back, back, I say! ye men of Sicily! All is not lost! Oh shame!---A few brave hearts In such a cause, ere now, have set their breasts Against the rush of thousands, and sustain'd, And made the shock recoil.---Ay, man, free man, Still to be called so, hath achieved such deeds As heaven and earth have marvell'd at; and souls, Whose spark yet slumbers with the days to come, Shall burn to hear: transmitting brightly thus Freedom from race to race!---Back! or prepare, Amidst your hearths, your bowers, your very shrines, To bleed and die in vain!---Turn, follow me! Conradin, Conradin!---for Sicily His spirit fights!---Remember Conradin! Ay, this is well!---Now follow me, and charge!Here rest thee, warrior. Rest, ay, death is rest,  And such will soon be mine---But, thanks toI shall not die a captive. Brave Sicilian! These lips are all unused to soothing words, Or I should bless the valour which hath won For my last hour, the proud free solitude Wherewith my soul would gird itself.---Thy name?'Twill be no music to thine ear, Montalba. Gaze---read it thus! Raimond di Procida! Thou hast pursued me with a bitter hate, But fare thee well! Heaven's peace be with thy soul! I must away---One glorious effort more And this proud field is won!  Am I thus humbled? How my heart sinks within me! But 'tis death (And he can tame the mightiest) hath subdued My towering nature thus!---Yet is he welcome! That youth---'twas in his pride he rescued me! I was his deadliest foe, and thus he proved His fearless scorn. Ha! ha! but he shall fail To melt me into womanish feebleness.  My lips for
						ever---mortal shall not hear Montalba say---"forgive!"The day is ours; but he, the brave unknown, Who turn'd the tide of battle; he whose path Was victory---who hath seen him? Procida! Be silent, traitor!---Bear him from my sight Unto your deepest dungeons. In the grave A nearer home awaits me.---Yet one word Ere my voice fail---thy son--- Speak, speak!  Thy son Knows not a thought of guilt. That trait'rous plot Was mine alone. Attest it, earth and heaven! My son is guiltless!---Hear it, Sicily! The blood of Procida is noble still! ---My son!---He lives, he lives!---His voice shall speak Forgiveness to his sire!---His name shall cast Its brightness o'er my soul! Oh, day of joy! The brother of my heart is worthy still The lofty name he bears. Anselmo, welcome! In a glad hour we meet, for know, my son  Is guiltless.  And victorious! by his arm All hath been rescued. How! th'unknown---  Was he! Thy noble Raimond! By Vittoria's hand Freed from his bondage in that awful hour When all was flight and terror. Now my cup Of joy too brightly mantles!---Let me press My warrior to a father's heart---and die; For life hath nought beyond!---Why comes he not? Anselmo, lead me to my valiant boy!Temper this proud delight. What means that look He hath not fallen? He lives.  Away, away! Bid the wide city with triumphal pomp Prepare to greet her victor. Let this hour Atone for all his wrongs!---Bear me to no dull couch, but let me die In the bright face of nature!---Lift my helm, That I may look on heaven. Lay him to rest On this green sunny bank, and I will call Some holy sister to his aid; but thou Return unto the field, for high-born men There need the peasant's aid. H ere gentler hands Shall tend thee, warrior; for in these retreats Of all that
						suffer. May'st thou live to bless them! Thus have I wish'd to die!---'Twas a proud strife! My father bless'd th'unknown who rescued him, (Bless'd him, alas! because unknown!) and Guido,Beside me bravely struggling, call'd aloud, "Noble Sicilian, on!" Oh! had they deem'd 'Twas I who led that rescue, they had spurn'd Mine aid, tho' 'twas deliverance; and their looks Had fallen, like blights, upon me.---There is one, Whose eye ne'er turn'd on mine, but its blue light Grew softer, trembling thro' the dewy mist Raised by deep tenderness!---Oh might the soul Set in that eye, shine on me ere I perish!  ---Is't not her voice? Oh! happy they, kind sister, Whom thus ye tend; for it is theirs to fall With brave men side by side, when the roused heart Beats proudly to the last!---There are high souls Whose hope was such a death, and 'tis denied! Young warrior, is there aught--- thou here, my Raimond!Joy, be it joy, my own, my blessed love, E'en on the grave's dim verge!---yes! it is joy!My Constance! victors have been crown'd, ere now, With the green shining laurel, when their brows Wore death's own impress---and it may be thus E'en yet, with me!---They freed me, when the foe Had half prevail'd, and I have proudly earn'd, With my heart's dearest blood, the meed to die Within thine arms.Oh! speak not thus---to die! These wounds may yet be closed.  Look on me, love!  Why, there is'Tis full of hope! and from thy
						kindled eye Breaks e'en unwonted light, whose ardent ray Seems born to be immortal! 'Tis e'en so!  The parting soul doth gather all her fires Around her; all her glorious hopes, and dreams, And burning aspirations, to illume The shadowy dimness of th'untrodden path Which lies before her; and, encircled thus, Awhile she sits in dying eyes, and thence Sends forth her bright farewell. Thy gentle cares Are vain, and yet I bless them. Say, not vain; The dying look not thus. We shall not part!I have seen death ere now, and known him wear Full many a changeful aspect. Oh! but none Radiant as thine, my warrior!---Thou wilt live! Look round thee!---all is sunshine---is not this A smiling world? Ay, gentlest love, a world Of joyous beauty and magnificence, Almost too fair to leave!---Yet must we tame Our ardent hearts to this!---Oh, weep thou not! There is no home for liberty, or love, Beneath these festal skies!---Be not deceived; My way lies far beyond!---I shall be soon That viewless thing which, with its mortal weeds Casting off meaner passions, yet, we trust,  Forgets not how to love!  And must this be? Heaven, thou art merciful!---Oh! bid our souls Depart together! Constance! there is strength Within thy gentle heart, which hath been proved Nobly, for me:---Arouse it once again! Thy grief unmans me---and I fain would meet That which approaches, as a brave man yields With proud submission to a mightier foe. ---It is upon me now! I will be calm. Let thy head rest upon my bosom, Raimond, And I will so suppress its quick deep sobs, They shall but rock thee to thy rest. There is A world, (ay, let us seek it!) where no blight Falls on the beautiful rose of youth, and there I shall be with thee soon! Lift up thy head, Brave youth, exultingly! for lo! thine hour Of glory comes!---Oh! doth it come too late? E'en now the false Alberti hath confess'd That guilty plot, for which thy life was doom'd To be th'atonement. 'Tis enough! Rejoice,  Rejoice, my Constance! for I leave a name O 'er which thou may'st weep proudly!  To thy breast Fold me yet closer, for an icy dart Hath touch'd my veins. And must thou leave me, Raimond? Alas! thine eye grows dim---its wandering glance Is full of dreams.Haste, haste, and tell my father I was no traitor!To that
						father's heart Return, forgiving all thy wrongs, return! Speak to me, Raimond!---Thou wert ever kind, And brave, and gentle! Say that all the past Shall be forgiven! That word from none but thee My lips e'er ask'd.---Speak to me once, my boy, My pride, my hope!---And is it with thee thus? Look on me yet!---Oh! must this woe be borne?Off with this weight of chains! it is not meet For a crown'd conqueror!---Hark, the trumpet's voice! Is't not a thrilling call?---What drowsy spell Benumbs me thus?---Hence! I am free again! Now swell your festal strains, the field is won! Sing me to glorious dreams. The strife is past.  There fled a noble spirit! Hush! he sleeps--- Disturb him not! Alas! this is no sleep From which the eye doth radiantly unclose: Bow down thy soul, for earthly hope is o'er!The shrines are deck'd, the festive torches blaze--- Where is our brave deliverer?---We are come To crown Palermo's victor! Ye come late. The voice of human praise doth send no echo Into the world of spirits.Is this dust I look on---Raimond!---'tis but sleep---a smile On his pale cheek sits proudly. Raimond, wake! Oh, God! and this was his triumphant day! My son, my injured son!Art thou his
						father?I know thee now.---Hence! with thy dark stern eye, And thy cold heart!---Thou canst not wake him now! Away! he will not answer but to me, For none like me hath loved him! He is mine! Ye shall not rend him from me.Oh! he knew
					Thy love, poor maid!---Shrink from me now no more! He knew thy heart---but who shall tell him nowThe depth, th'intenseness, and the agony, Of my suppress'd affection?---I have learn'd All his high worth in time---to deck his grave! Is there not power in the strong spirit's woe To force an answer from the viewless world Of the departed?---Raimond!---Speak! forgive! Raimond! my victor, my deliverer, hear! Why, what a world is this!---Truth ever bursts On the dark soul too late: And glory crowns Th'unconscious dead! And an hour comes to break The mightiest hearts!---My son! my son! is this A day of triumph?---Ay, for thee alone!