Carbo denied a hearing!Ay, and Marcellus cast into prison, because he sued a friend of one of the
						decemvirs for a sum of money he had lent him.And Appius resisted not? Appius, that in the first decemvirate was a god
						to the people!Resisted not! Nay, was most loud in favour of the decree; but hither comes
						Virginius, who interested himself so much in Carbo's affair. He looks a
						little heated. Is not that Titus he is speaking to? Stand aside, master, and
						listen.Why did you make him decemvir, and first decemvir too?We had tried him, and found him honest.And could you not have remained content? Why try him again to find him
						dishonest? Knew ye not he was a patrician, and of the Claudian
						family?He laid down the consulate---Ha! ha! ha!---to be elected into the decemvirate, and he was so; and he
						laid down his office of decemvir to be re-elected into the decemvirate, and
						he is so; ay, by Jupiter! and to the exclusion of his late colleagues! Did
						not Titus Genutius lay down the consulate?He did.Was he not next to Appius in the decemvirate? He was.Did you not find him honest?We did find him honest.As honest as Appius Claudius?Quite as honest.Quite as honest!---and why not re-elect him decemvir? Most sapient people!
						You re-elect Appius into the decemvirate for his honesty, and you thrust
						Titus out of the decemvirate---I suppose for his honesty also! Why, Appius
						was sick of the decemvirate.I never heard him say so.But he did say so---say so in my hearing; in presence of the senators
						Valerius and Caius Claudius, and I don't know how many others. 'Twas known
						to the whole body of the senate---not that he was sick, but that he said so.
						Yes, yes; he and his colleagues, he said, had done the work of the republic
						for a whole year, and it was now but just to grant them a little repose, and
						appoint others to succeed them.Well, well, we can only say he changed his mind.No, no, we needn't say that neither! As he had laboured in the
						decemvirate, perhaps he thought he might as well repose in the
						decemvirate.I know not what he thought. He is decemvir, and we made him so, and cannot
						help ourselves. Fare you well, Virginius. Come, let's to the Forum. You help'd
						to put your masters on your backs: They like their seat, and make you show your paces. They ride you---sweat you---curb you---lash you---and You cannot throw them off with all your mettle! But here comes one, whose share in giving you To such unsparing riders, touches me More nearly, for that I've an interest In proving him a man of fair and most Erect integrity. Good day, Icilius.Worthy Virginius! 'tis an evil day For Rome, that gives her more convincing proof, The thing, she took for hope, is but a base And wretched counterfeit! Our new decemvirs Are anything but friends to justice and Their country.You, Icilius, had a hand In their election. You applied to me To aid you with my vote in the comitia: I told you then, and tell you, now, again, I am not pleased when a patrician bends His head to a plebeian's girdle. Mark me! I'd rather he should stand aloof, and wear His shoulder high---especially the nephew Of Caius Claudius. 'Twas a high gage, and men have staked a higher On grounds as poor as yours---their honour, boy! Icilius, I have heard it all---your plans--- The understanding 'twixt the heads of the people--- Of whom, Icilius, you are reckon'd one, and Worthily---and Appius Claudius---all!--- 'Twas every jot disclosed to me.By whom?Siccius Dentatus.He disclosed it to you? Siccius Dentatus is a crabbéd man.Siccius Dentatus is an honest man! There's not a worthier in Rome! How now! Has he deceived me? Do you call him liar? My friend! my comrade! honest Siccius, That fought in six-score battles!Good Virginius, Siccius Dentatus is my friend---the friend Of every honest man in Rome---a brave man--- A most brave man. Except yourself, Virginius, I do not know the man I prize above Siccius Dentatus---yet he's a crabbéd man.Yes, yes; he is a crabbéd man.A man  No, not a whit, where he sees double dealing. You are the best judge of your own concerns; Yet, if it please you to communicate With me upon this subject, come and see me. I told you, boy, I favour'd not this stealing And winding into place. What he deserves, An honest man dares challenge 'gainst the world--- But come and see me. Appius Claudius, chosen Decemvir, and his former colleagues, that Were quite as honest as himself, not chosen--- No, not so much as named by him, who named Himself, and his new associates! Well, 'tis true, Dog fights with dog, but honesty is not A cur, that baits his fellow---and e'en dogs, By habit of companionship, abide In terms of faith and cordiality--- But come and see me.Appius comes! The people still throng after him with shouts, Unwilling to believe their Jupiter Has mark'd them for his thunder. Will you stay, And see the homage that they render him?Not I! Stay you; and, as you made him, hail him; And shout, and wave your hand, and cry, "Long live  For he is
						first and last, and every one! Rome owes you much, Icilius---Fare you well--- I shall be glad to see you at my house.Long live our first decemvir! Long live Appius Claudius! Most noble Appius! Appius and the decemvirate for ever!My countrymen and fellow-citizens, We shall deserve your favour.You have deserved it, And will deserve it.For that end we named Ourself decemvir.You could not have named a better man.For his own purposeBe assured, we hold Our power but for your good. Your gift it was: And gifts make surest debtors. Fare you well--- And, for your salutations, pardon me If I repay you only with an echo--- Long live the worthy citizens of Rome! ---especially that of Appius Claudius! A most delicate echo!What means Dentatus?He's ever carping---nothing pleases him.Oh! yes---you please me---please me mightily, I assure you.---You are
						noble legislators, take most especial care of your own interests, bestow
						your votes most wisely too---on him who has the wit to get you into the
						humour; and, withal, have most musical voices---most musical---if one may
						judge by their echo.Why, what quarrel have you with our choice? Could we have chosen
						better?---I say they are ten honest decemvirs we have chosen.I pray you name them me.There's Appius Claudius, first decemvir---Ay, call him the head. You are right. Appius Claudius, the head. Go
						on!And Quintus Fabius Vibulanus---The body, that eats and drinks while the head thinks. Call him Appius's
						stomach. Fill him, and keep him from cold and indigestion, and he'll never
						give Appius the headache! Well?---There's excellent comfort in having a good
						stomach! ---Well?There's Cornelius, Marcus Servilius, Minucius, and Titus
						Antonius---Arms, legs, and thighs! And Marcus Rabuleius---He'll do for a hand, and, as he's a senator, we'll call him the
						right-hand. We couldn't do less, you know, for a senator! Well?At least, you'll say we did well in electing Quintius Petilius, Caius
						Duellius, and Spurius Oppius---men of our order!---sound men!---known
						sticklers for the people.---At least you'll say we did well in that!And who dares say otherwise? "Well!" one might as well say "ill" as
						"well." "Well" is the very skirt of commendation; next neighbour to that
						mire and gutter, "ill." "Well" indeed! you acted like yourselves. Nay, e'en
						yourselves could not have acted better. Why, had you not elected them,
						Appius would have gone without his left hand, and each of his two
						feet!Out! you are dishonest!Ha!What would content you?A post in a hot battle. Out, you cur! Do you talk to me?Down with him, he does nothing but insult the people. uttered that dishonest word? Who uttered it, I say? Let him answer a
						fitter, though less worthy, mate---Lucius Icilius.Stand back, and hear Icilius.What! haven't I voted for the decemvirs, and do I snarl at his jests? Has
						he not a right to jest? the good, honest Siccius Dentatus, that, alone, at
						the head of the veterans, vanquished the AEqui for you. Has he not a right
						to jest? For shame!---Get to your houses! The worthy Dentatus! Cheer for
						him, if you are Romans! Cheer for him before you go! Cheer for him, I
						say!And now, what thanks do you expect from me, Icilius?None.By Jupiter, young man, had you thus stepped before me in the heat of
						battle, I should have cloven you down---but I'm obliged to you,
						Icilius---and hark you! There's a piece of furniture in the house of a
						friend of mine, that's called Virginius, I think you've set your heart
						upon---dainty enough; yet not amiss for a young man to covet. Ne'er lose
						your hopes! He may be brought into the mind to part with it. As to these
						curs, I question which I value less, their fawnings or their snarlings. I
						thank you, boy! Do you walk this way? I am glad of it. Come! 'Tis a noble
						decemvirate you have chosen for us! Come!And is this all you have observed? I think There's nothing strange in that. An L and an I Twined with a V. Three very innocent letters To have bred such mischief in thy brain, good Servia. Come, read this riddle to me.You may laugh, Virginius; but I'll read the riddle right. The L doth stand for Lucius; and the I, Icilius; which, I take it, will compose, "Lucius Icilius."So it will, good Servia.Then, for the V; why, that is plain, "Virginia."And now, what conjuration find you here?What should I find, but love? The maid's in love; In love, and it is with Icilius. Look, the wreath Is made of roses, that entwines the letters.And this is all?And is it not enough? You'll find this figuring where'er you look: There's not a piece of dainty work she does--- Embroidery, or painting---not a task She finishes, but on the skirt, or border, In needle-work, or pencil, this, her secret, The silly wench betrays. Stay! Have you spoken to her of
						it?I! Not I, indeed; I left that task to you--- Though once I ask'd her what the letters meant. She laugh'd, and drew a scratch across them; but Had scarce done so, ere her fair visage fell, For grief that she had spoil'd the ciphers---and A sigh came out, and then almost a tear; And then she look'd as piteous on the harm That she had done, as she had done it to A thing had sense to feel it. Never after She let me note her at her work again. She had good reason!Send her to me, Servia. There's something here, that promises to bring me Anticipation of my wish. I think Icilius loves my daughter---nay, I know it; And such a man would challenge for her husband;--- And only waited, till her forward spring Put on, a little more, the genial likeness Of colouring into summer, ere I sought To nurse a flower, which, blossoming too early, Too early often dies; but if it springs Spontaneous, and, unlook'd for, woos our hand  And 'twere
						untimely, as unkind, to check it. I'll ascertain it shortly---soft, she comes.Well, father, what's your will?I wish'd to see you, To ask you of your tasks---how they go on--- And what your masters say of you---what last You did. I hope you never play The truant?The truant! No, indeed, Virginius.I am sure you do not---kiss me!O my father! I am so happy when you're kind to me!You are so happy when I'm kind to you! Am I not always kind? I never spoke An angry word to you in all my life, Virginia! You are happy when I'm kind! That's strange; and makes me think you have some reason To fear I may be otherwise than kind--- Is't so, my girl?Indeed, I did not know What I was saying to you!Why, that's worse And worse! What! when you said your father's kindness Made you so happy, am I to believe  I---Go fetch me The latest task you did.  Her artless speech, like crystal, shows the
						thing 'Twould hide, but only covers. 'Tis enough! She loves, and fears her father may condemn!Here, Sir.What's this?'Tis Homer's story, father, Of brave Achilles parting from Briseis.You have done it well. The colouring is good, The figures well design'd. 'Tis very well!--- Whose face is this you've given to Achilles?Whose face?I've seen this face! Tut! tut! I know it As well as I do my own, yet can't bethink me Whose face it is!You mean Achilles' face?Did I not say so! 'Tis the very face Of---No! no! Not of him. There's too much youth And comeliness, and too much fire, to suit The face of Siccius Dentatus.Oh!  Why, no; for now I look again, I'd swear You lost the copy, ere you drew the head; And, to requite Achilles for the want Of his own face, contrived to borrow one  From Lucius Icilius.I am glad
						to see you!'Tis not for my news, then.Your news! What news?More violence and wrong from these new masters of ours---our noble
						decemvirs---these demi-gods of the good people of Rome! No man's property is
						safe from them. Nay, it appears we hold our wives and daughters but by the
						tenure of their will. Their liking is the law. The senators themselves,
						scared at their audacious rule, withdraw themselves to their villas, and
						leave us to our fate. There are rumours, also, of new incursions by the
						Sabines.Rome never saw such days!And she'll see worse, unless I fail in my reckoning. Is that Virginia? I
						saw her not before. How does the fair Virginia? Why, she is quite a woman. I
						was just now wishing for a daughter.A plague, you mean.I am sure you should not say so.Indeed he should not; and he does not say so,  But that he does not
						think me one, for all I do to weary him. I am sure, Dentatus, If to be thought to do well is to do well, There's nothing I do ill; but it is far From that! for few things do I as I ought--- Yet everything is well done with my father, Dentatus.That's well done, is it not, my friend? But if you had a daughter, what would you do with her?I'd give her to Icilius. I should have been just now torn to pieces, but
						for his good offices. The gentle citizens--- that are driven about by the
						decemvirs' lictors, like a herd of tame oxen, and, with most beast-like
						docility, only low applauses to them in return---would have done me the
						kindness to knock my brains out; but the noble Icilius bearded them singly,
						and railed them into temper. Had I a daughter worthy of such a husband, he
						should have such a wife, and a patrician's dower along with her. touching the views of these new tyrants, that we are cursed withal, I
						disclaim him as my friend! I cast him off for ever!How is it with my heart? I feel as one That has lost everything, and just before Had nothing left to wish for! He will cast Icilius off!---I never told it yet; But take of me, thou gentle air, the secret--- And ever after breathe more balmy sweet--- I love Icilius! Yes, although to thee I fear to tell it, that hast neither eye To scan my looks, nor voice to echo me, Nor e'en an o'er-apt ear to catch my words; Yet, sweet invisible confidant, my secret Once being thine---I tell thee, and I'll tell thee Again---and yet again. I love Icilius! He'll cast Icilius off!---not if Icilius Approve his honour. That he's sure to do; He speaks, and looks, and moves a thing of honour, Or honour never yet spoke, look'd, or moved, Or was a thing of earth! O come, Icilius! Do but appear, and thou art vindicated. Virginia! sweet Virginia! Sure I heard My name pronounced. Was it by thee, Virginia?  Thou dost not answer! Then it My father is incensed with thee. Dentatus Has, told him of the new decemvirate, How they abuse their office. You, he knows, Have favour'd their election, and he fears May have some understanding of their plans.He wrongs me then!I thank the gods!For me! Virginia? Do you thank the gods for me? Your eye is moist---yet that may be for pity. Your hand doth tremble---that may be for fear; Your cheek is cover'd o'er with blushes! What, O what can that be for?Icilius, leave me!Leave thee, Virginia! O, a word---a word Trembles upon my tongue, which, if it match The thought that moves thee, now, and thou wilt let me Pronounce that word, to speak that thought for thee, I'll breathe, though I expire in the ecstasy Of uttering it.Icilius, will you leave me?Love! Love! Virginia! Love!---If I have spoken Thy thought aright, ne'er be it said again, The heart requires more service than the tongue  Two
						hearts---but lest it should o'erboast itself, Two hearts with but one thought! Virginia! Virginia, speak!  So much the more ecstatic my
						delight, To find thee mine at length.My secret's yours. Keep it and honour it, Icilius.Icilius here!I ask thee now to leave me!Leave thee! who leaves a treasure he has coveted So long, and found so newly, ere he scans it Again, and yet again; and asks and answers, Repeats and answers, answers and repeats, The half-mistrustful half-assured question--- And is it mine, indeed?Indeed! indeed! Now leave me!I must see thy father first, And lay my soul before him.Not to-night!Now worse than ever, dear Virginia! Can I endure his doubts; I'll lay my soul Naked before him---win his friendship quite,  Stop, Icilius! Thou seest that hand? It is a Roman's, boy; 'Tis sworn to liberty---It is the friend Of honour. Dost thou think so?Do I think Virginius owns that hand!Then you'll believe It has an oath deadly to tyranny, And is the foe of falsehood! By the gods, Knew it the lurking-place of treason, though It were a brother's heart, 'twould drag the caitiff Forth. Darest thou take that hand?I dare, Virginius.Then take it! Is it weak in thy embrace? Returns it not thy gripe? Thou wilt not hold Faster by it than it will hold by thee! I overheard thee say, thou wast resolved To win my friendship quite---Thou canst not win What's thine already! You will stay, my boy, And sup with us to-night?To be sure he will!And, hark you, Sir, At your convenient time, appoint a day Your friends and kinsmen may confer with me--- There is a bargain I would strike with you.  To lead
						Virginia in, or will you do it? Come on, I say; come on. Your hand, Dentatus.This way! We muster at the Flaminian gate.Shall we not wait for Decius?No; were he ten times Decius.---They'll have already begun their march.
						Come on!Do you belong to the fourth legion?We do.They are upon their march, then?I told you so---Come on! come on!Numitorius, what soldiers were those that just now parted from you?Soldiers hastening to overtake the army, that's now upon its march.'Tis all confirmed, then; the Sabines are in force upon our
						borders.I pray you tell me something new! Know you not that the senate has met,
						and that the decemvirs have come off triumphant, in spite of all
						opposition?Should they have been opposed in such a strait as this?Ay, should they! They dared not have armed a single citizen without the
						order of the senate; which, had they not obtained, the country would have
						been left naked to the foe; and, then, they had been forced to make room for
						more popular magistrates.Why were they not opposed, then? Appius's own uncle, and Honorius, that noble senator, opposed them; and
						it was like to go against them, but for the brawling insolence of Spurius
						Oppius, and the effrontery of the head decemvir, backed by the young
						patricians.So they are empowered to take up arms?To be sure they are; and they have done so. One body has already marched,
						and by this time, no doubt, has come to blows with the enemy. The levy is
						still proceeding. All the decemvirs, but Appius, take the field. He remains
						in Rome to keep good order, that is the violator of all order. Why, where
						have you been, Lucius, to have felt no movement of so great and wide a stir?
						Your brother meets Virginius at his house to-day. Come with me thither, for
						you I know are bid. Lucius, there's no huzzaing for your decemvirs now. Come
						on! 'Tis close upon the hour.Welcome, Icilius! Welcome, friends! Icilius, I hoped to speak with you, to-day, of feasting And merriment, but war is now the word; One that unlovingly keeps time with mirth, Unless war's own---when the fierce fight is won, And, safe carousing, comrades drink to victory!Virginius! have you changed your mind?My mind? What mind? How now! Are you that boy, Icilius, You set your heart so earnestly upon A dish of poor confections, that to balk you Makes you look blank! I did design to feast you Together with your friends. The times are changed--- The march, the tent, the fight becomes us now!Virginius!Well!Virginius!How the boy Reiterates my name!There's not a hope I have but is the client of Virginius!Well, well! I only meant to put it off! We'll have the revel yet! the board shall smoke! The cup shall sparkle, and the jest shall soar  Not till
						the war be done, though---Yet, ere then, Some tongue, that now needs only wag to make The table ring, may have a tale to tell So petrifying, that it cannot utter it! I'll make all sure, that you may be my guest At any rate---although you should be forced To play the host for me and feast yourself.  Look here,How think you?---Will it meet the charge? Will it not do? We want a witness, though! I'll bring one; of whom if you approve, I'll sign The bond. I'll wait upon you instantly.How feel you now, Icilius?Like a man Whom the next moment makes or quite unmakes. With the intensity of exquisite Suspense, my breathing thickens, and my heart Beats heavily, and with remittent throb, As like to lose its action---See! my hope Is bless'd! I live! I live!You are my witnesses, That this young creature I present to you, I boast of, as my profitably cherish'd, And most deservedly belovéd child;  And act---yet even
						more in act than word; And---for the man who hopes to win her hand--- A virgin, from whose lips a soul as pure Exhales, as e'er responded to the blessing  Breathed in a parent's kiss. You are upon your knee, young man, look up; And lift your hand to heaven---You will be all Her father has been---added unto all A lover would be!All that man should be To woman, I will be to her!The oath Is register'd! Didst thou but know, young man, How fondly I have watch'd her, since the day Her mother died, and left me to a charge Of double duty bound---how she hath been My ponder'd thought by day, my dream by night, My prayer, my vow, my offering, my praise, My sweet companion, pupil, tutor, child!--- Thou wouldst not wonder that my drowning eye, And choking utterance, upbraid my tongue That tells thee, she is thine!---Icilius, I now betroth her to thee! When the war  Virginia! my Virginia! I am all Dissolved---o'erpower'd with the munificence Of this auspicious hour---and thou, nor movest--- Nor look'st---nor speak'st---to bless me with a sign Of sweet according joy!---I love thee, but To make thee happy! If to make thee so Be bliss denied to me---lo, I release The gifted hand---that I would faster hold, Than wretches, bound for death, would cling to life. If thou wouldst take it back---then take it back.I take it back---to give it thee again!O help me to a word to speak my bliss, Or I am beggar'd---No! There's no such word! There cannot be; for never man had bliss Like mine to name!Thou dost but beggar me, Icilius, when thou makest thyself a bankrupt; Placing a value on me far above My real little worth.---I'd help thee to A hundred words; each one of which would far O'er-rate thy gain, and yet no single one Rate over high!Thou couldst not do it! No; Thou couldst not do it! Every term of worth  Would
						leave with thee a rich remainder still!--- Pick from each rarer pattern of thy sex Her rarest charm, till thou hast every charm Of soul and body that can blend in woman, I would out-paragon the paragon With thee!And if thou wouldst, I'd find thee, for Thy paragon, a mate---if that can be A mate which beats the thing 'tis ta'en to match--- One that would make thy paragon look poor--- And I would call that so o'ermatching mate "Icilius."No! I will not let thee win On such a theme as this!Nor will I drop The controversy, that the richer makes me The more I lose!My sweet Virginia, We do but lose and lose, and win and win; Playing for nothing but to lose and win. Then let us drop the game---and thus I stop it.Witness, my friends, that seal! Observe, it is A living one! It is Icilius' seal; And stamp'd upon as true and fair a bond---  As ever signet
						kiss'd! Are all content? Speak else! She is thy free affianced wife, Thou art her free affianced husband! Come, We have o'erdrawn our time---Farewell, Virginia; Thy future husband for a time must be Bellona's. To thy tasks, again, my child; Be thou the bride of study for a time. Farewell!My father!May the gods protect thee!My father!Does the blood forsake thy cheek? Come to my arms once more! Remember, girl, The first and foremost debt a Roman owes Is to his country; and it must be paid, If need be, with his life.---Why, how you hold me! Icilius, take her from me! Servia! Come, boy.Farewell, Virginia!Take her in!The gods be with thee, my Icilius! Father, The gods be with thee---and Icilius.Come! I swear a battle might be fought and won In half the time! Now, once for all, farewell!  Does he not
						tread on Roman ground! Come on! Come on!---Charge on him!---Drive him back, or die!It was a triumph, the achieving which O'erpaid the hazard that we ran---though great. They have made trial of their strength, and learn'd Its value from defeat. The senate knows Its masters now; and the decemvirate, To make its reign eternal, only needs Its own decree. Ere this the saucy foe Has met the chastisement he merited; Which turns his bold assault to shameful flight, Leaving us, henceforth, leisure to enjoy The boundless harvest of our glorious daring! Tyranny thrives in Rome! O Tyranny! How godlike is thy port! Thou givest and takest, And ask'st no other leave, than what thy own Imperial will accords. Jove does no more! Now, Claudius---We have suffer'd a defeat!What! The decemvirs fly!The soldiers fight With only half a heart. The other half Looks on, and cares not which side proves the winner.Then decimate them. Traitors! Recreants! Why, we shall have them at our very doors! Have we lost ground, my Claudius? What we've retraced in fame. We strove to
						teach The enemy their road lay backwards, but They would not turn their faces for us. Each Retains his former line.What news?The AEqui Still press upon us. Rumours are afloat Of new disasters, which the common cry, Be sure, still multiplies and swells. Dentatus, That over-busy, crabbéd veteran, Walks up and down among the people, making Your plans his theme of laughter. Nought he stints That may reflect you in an odious light, And lower the decemvirate.A dungeon Would do good service to him! Once within, Strangling were easy! We must stop his mouth--- Unwholesome food---or liquor---Where was he When last you heard him?In the Forum.So! He is past service, is he not? Some way To clear the city of him. Come, we'll hear him, And answer him, and silence him! 'Tis well  Our guard
						against his bite. Come to the Forum!What's to be done?We'll be undone---that's to be done.We'll do away with the decemvirate.You'll do away with the decemvirate?---The decemvirate will do away with
						you! You'll do away with yourselves! Do nothing!---The enemy will do away
						with both of you. In another month a Roman will be a stranger in Rome. A
						fine pass we are come to, masters!But something must be done.Why, what would you have? You shout and clap your hands, as if it were a
						victory you heard of; and yet you cry--- Something must be done! Truly, I
						know not what that something is, unless it be to make you General. How say
						you, masters?We'd follow any man that knew how to lead us, and would rid us of our
						foes, and the decemvirate together. faces you make at it!But tell us the news again.Is it so good? Does it so please you? Then prick your ears again, and
						listen. We have been beaten again--- beaten back on our own soil. Rome has
						seen its haughty masters fly before chastisement, like slaves---returning
						cries for blows---and all this of your decemvirs, gentlemen!Huzza for it again!Hush! Appius comes. ---I say, to the eternal infamy of Rome, the foe has chased her sons,
						like hares, on their own soil, where they should prey like lions---and so
						they would, had they not keepers to tame them.What's that you are saying to the people, Siccius Dentatus?I am regaling them with the news.The news? eagle in the talons of the kite?It is not well done in you, Dentatus, to chafe a sore. It makes it rankle.
						If your surgery has learned no better, it should keep its hands to itself!
						You have very little to do, to busy yourself after this fashion.I busy myself as I like, Appius Claudius.I know you do, when you labour to spread disaffection among the people,
						and bring the decemvirs into contempt.The decemvirs bring themselves into contempt.Ha! dare you say so?Dare! I have dared cry "Come on!" to a cohort of bearded warriors---Is it
						thy smooth face should appal me? Dare!---It never yet flurried me to use my
						arm---Shall I not, think you, be at my ease when I but wag my tongue? Dare,
						indeed!Your grey hairs should keep company with honester speech! These are the vouchers of honest deeds---Such is the speech with which my
						grey hairs keep company. I tell you, to your teeth, the decemvirs bring
						themselves into contempt.What, are they not serving their country at the head of her armies? I'd name for thee a hundred centurions would make better generals! A
						common soldier of a year's active service would take his measures better!
						Generals! Our generals were wont to teach us how to win battles.---Tactics
						are changed; your generals instruct us how to lose them.Do you see my lictors?There are twelve of them.What if I bid them seize thee?They'd blush to do it.Why now, Dentatus, I begin to know you; I fancied you a man that loved to vent His causeless anger in an under-breath, And speak it in the ear---and only then When there was safety! Such a one, you'll own, Is dangerous; and to be trusted, as A friend or foe, unworthy. But I see You rail to faces! Have you not so much Respect for Appius as to take him by The hand, when he confesses you have some Pretence to quarrel with his colleagues' plans, And find fault with himself?---which yet, you'll own, May quite as well be kindly done, Dentatus, As harshly. Had you only to myself Declared your discontents, the more you had rail'd, The more I should have thank'd you. And have you been campaigning, then, so long, And prosperously---and mistrust you, Siccius, That a young scarless soldier, like myself, Would listen to your tutoring? See, now, How much you have mistaken me! Dentatus, In a word---Can you assist the generals, And will you?I have all the will---but as For the ability---Tut! tut! Dentatus, You vex me now. This coyness sits not well on you! You know as well as I, you have as much Ability as will. I would not think you A man that loved to find fault, but to find it! Surely the evil you complain of, you Would lend a hand to remedy! See, now, 'Tis fairly put to you---what say you?Appius, You may use me as you please.And that will be, As you deserve. I'll send you, as my legate,  To the army.A lucky omen, that! Away! away! Apprise your house---Prepare for setting out.  Rate high as
						hours! Assist my colleagues with Your counsel; if their plans displease you, why Correct them---change them---utterly reject them. And if you meet obstruction, notice me, And I will push it by. There, now! Your hand! Again! Away! All the success attend you That Appius wishes you!Success is from The gods, whose hand soe'er it pleases them To send it by. I know not what success 'Tis Appius' wish they send; but this I know I am a soldier; and, as a soldier, I Am bound to serve. All the success I ask, Is that which benefits my country, Appius. You've served her over long!Now for our causes.Do you see the drift of this?I cannot guess it.Nor I.Are you the suitor in this cause? Speak!Noble Appius, if there's law in Rome, To right a man most injured, to that law Against you proud patrician I appeal.No more of that, I say! Because he's rich  Because
						you're poor and mean, you call yourself Injured. Relate your story; and, so please you, Spare epithets.Grant me a minute's pause, And I'll begin.You have heard the news?What news, dear uncle?Step Aside with me, I'll tell you.Can it be A mortal that I look upon?They are safe! I thank the gods!Her eyes look up to heaven Like something kindred to it---rather made To send their glances down, and fill the earth With worship and with gratulation. What A thrill runs up and down my veins, and all Throughout me!Now, most noble Appius---Stop! Put off the cause; I cannot hear it, now. Attend to-morrow. An oppressive closeness Allows me not to breathe. Lictors! make clear  Claudius! Claudius!--- Marcus, go you and summon my physician To be at home before me. Claudius, look!You send a messenger to-night?I do.Paint me that smile! I never saw a smile Till now. My Claudius, is she not a wonder? I know not whether in the state of girlhood Or womanhood to call her. 'Twixt the two She stands, as that were loath to lose her, this To win her most impatient. The young year Trembling and blushing 'twixt the striving kisses Of parting spring and meeting summer, seems Her only parallel!'Tis well! I'll send Your father word of this. But have you not A message to Icilius?Mark you, Claudius? There is a blush! I must possess her.Tell him, I think upon him. Farewell, Numitorius!Farewell, Virginia.Master, will you tell me  She is call'd Virginia, daughter of Virginius; A Roman citizen, and a centurion Now with the army.She is very like The daughter of a friend of mine. Farewell.I burn, my Claudius! brain and heart---there's not A fibre in my body but's on fire! With what a gait she moves! Such was not Hebe, Or Jupiter had sooner lost his heaven, Than changed his cupbearer! A step like that The rapture-glowing clouds might well bear up, And never take for human! Find me, Claudius, Some way to compass the possession of her!'Tis difficult---her father's of repute; The highest of his class.I guess'd it! Friends Are ever friends, except when they are needed.Nay, Appius!If thou canst not give me hope, Be dumb!A female agent may be used With some success.How? How? That woman who attends her.Set about it.Could she but be induced to help you to A single meeting with her---Claudius! Claudius! Effect but that!I'll instantly about it.Spare not my gold---nor stop at promises. I will fulfil them fast as thou canst make them. To purchase such a draught of ecstasy I'd drain a kingdom---Set about it, Claudius! Away! I will not eat, nor drink, nor sleep, Until I hear from thee!Depend upon me!I do, my Claudius, for my life---my life!It is not love, if what I've felt before And call'd by such a name be love---a thing That took its turn---that I could entertain, Put off, or humour. 'Tis some other thing; Or if the same, why in some other state--- Or I am not the same---or it hath found Some other part of sensibility More quick, whereon to try its power, and there Expends it all! Now, Claudius, your success?Nothing would do, yet nothing left undone! She was not to be purchased.Did she guess---She could not. So guarded was my agent; who described you A man of power, of noble family, And regal fortune---one that ask'd not what His pleasures cost---no further made disclosure.And did it nothing move her, Claudius?Nothing. The more my agent urged, the more the shrunk And wither'd hag grew callous. Further press'd And with more urgent importuning; ire And scorn, in imprecations and invectives, Vented upon the monster---as she call'd him---  To drop
						the suit she saw was hopeless.Now Had I a friend indeed!Has Appius need To search for such a friend, and Claudius by him?Friends ever are provisionally friends--- Friends for so far---friends just to such a point, And then "farewell!"---friends with an understanding--- As "should the road be pretty safe"---"the sea  Not over-rough," and so on---friends of AndWould be a simple
						thorough-going friend!I thought you had one, Appius.So thought Appius, Till Appius thought upon a test of friendship, He fears he would not render to himself, Could he be Appius' friend.Then Appius has A truer friend than Appius is to Appius. I'll give that test!What! you'd remove her father And that Icilius whom you told me of?Count it a thing already done.My Claudius!  That, when I
						look'd for thee to stop and leave me, I find thee, keeping with me, step by step; And even in thy loving eagerness Outstriding me?---I do not want thee, Claudius, To soil thy hand with their plebeian blood.What wouldst thou, then?I was left guardian to thee---Thou wast.Among the various property Thy father left were many female slaves.Well?It were easy for thee, were it not, To invent a tale that one of them confess'd She had sold a female infant (and, of course, Thy slave) unto Virginius' wife, who pass'd it Upon Virginius as his daughter, which Supposititious offspring is this same Virginia.I conceive you.To induce Your agent to confirm your tale would cost But small persuasion. Is it done?This hour! I'll find the school, my Appius, where Virginia  And seize her as
						my slave, at once. Do thou Repair to thy tribunal, whither, should Her friends molest me in the attempt, I'll bring her, And plead my cause before thee.Claudius! Claudius! How shall I pay thee? O, thou noble friend! Power, fortune, life, whate'er belongs to Appius, Reckon as thine! Away, away, my Claudius!Well, masters, any news of Siccius Dentatus from the camp, how he was
						received by the decemvirs?He was received well by the decemvirs.It wasn't then for the love they bear him.But they expect he'll help them to return the cuffs they have gotten from
						the enemy.Do you wish for a victory?Yes, if Dentatus wins it. 'Tis to our credit, masters ---He's one of
						us.And is not Spurius Oppius one of us?He is; but he's in league with the patricians---that is, the patrician
						decemvirs. He is but half a plebeian, and that is the worst half. The better
						half he threw away when he became half a patrician. I never liked your
						half-and-half gentry; they generally combine the bad of both kinds, without
						the good of either.Well, we shall have news presently. Your brother, Icilius, has just
						arrived with despatches from the camp. I met him passing through the Forum,
						and asked him what news he brought. He answered, none; but added, we might
						look for news of another kind than what we had been lately accustomed to
						hear.What's that!Look yonder, masters! See! 'Tis Appius's client dragging a young woman along with him.Let us stand by each other, masters, and prevent him.Help! help! help!Let go your hold!Stand by! She is my slave!His slave? Help! help! His slave?--- He looks more like a slave than she! Good masters! Protect the daughter of Virginius!Release the maid.Forbear this violence.I call for the assistance of the laws; She is my slave.She is my daughter, masters, My foster-daughter; and her mother was A free-born woman---and her father is A citizen!---a Roman!---good Virginius, As I said before---Virginius, the centurion, Whom all of you must know.---Help! help! I say. You see she cannot speak to help herself; Speak for her, masters---help her, if you're men!Let go your hold!Obstruct me at your peril!We'll make you, if you will not! Let go your hold, once more!Good masters! patience--- Hear me, I say---She is my slave---I wish not To use this violence, my friends; but may not A master seize upon his slave?---Make way, Or such of you as are dissatisfied, Repair with me to the decemvir.---Come, I only want my right!Come on, then!Ay, To the decemvir!Run, run for Numitorius!---Alarm our neighbours! ---Call out Icilius'
						friends!---I shall go mad! Help! help! help!Will he succeed?---Will he attempt it?---Will he  Go through with it?---He had not
						undertaken it; yet wish, More than I wish for life, he may accomplish What he has undertaken. O! the pause That precedes action! It is vacancy That o'erweighs action's substance. What I fear Most is the hour. My blind impatience saw not 'Twas day! Her all-persuasive charms, alone Will gather round her, from the passers-by Troops to her succour!---What, then, with the aid Of cries and tears, enforcing their appeal? That sound brings feet in haste!---He brings her, but Behemm'd with friends!---Now, play for love, As boldly as for power! I must prepare For his reception.Do not press upon me; Here's the decemvir---he will satisfy you, Whether a master has a right, or not, To seize his slave whene'er he finds her.Slave! She is no slave. Thou liest to call her so! She never was a slave! Thou worse than slave! To give her such a name---Ay! threaten me!  Or never was a
						free-born maid in Rome! O! you shall dearly answer for it!Peace! What quarrel's this? Speak, those who are aggrieved.Where is Virginia---Wherefore do you hold That maiden's hand?Who asks the question?I! Her uncle Numitorius!Numitorius, You think yourself her uncle---Numitorius, No blood of yours flows in her veins, to give you The title that you claim. Most noble Appius! If you sit here for justice, as I hope You do, attend not to the clamour of  This man, who calls himself this damsel'sShe is my property---was born beneath My father's roof, whose slave her mother was, Who---as I can establish past dispute--- Sold her, an infant, to Virginius' wife, Who never had a child, and heavily Revolved her barrenness. My slave I have found And scized---as who that finds his own (no matter How long so ever miss'd) should fear to take it?  Their
						counter-proofs, and bring the cause to trial! But till they prove I know not what's mine own--- An undertaking somewhat perilous--- Mine own I shall retain---yet giving them, Should they demand it, what security They please for re-producing her.Why that Would seem but reasonable.Reasonable! Claudius!   Of some more powerful
						contriver.My niece's father is from Rome, thou
						know'st, Serving his country. Is it not unjust, In the absence of a citizen, to suffer His right to his own child to be disputed? Grant us a day to fetch Virginius, That he himself may answer this most foul And novel suit---Meanwhile, to me belongs The custody of the maid. Her uncle's house Can better answer for her honour than The house of Claudius. 'Tis the law of Rome, Before a final sentence, the defendant May not sustain in what he still possesses  A just law.And a most reasonable demand.Ay! Ay! Ay!Silence, you citizens! Will you restrain Your tongues, and give your magistrate permission To speak? The law is just---most reasonable--- I framed that law myself---I will maintain That law!Most noble Appius!A most just decree!Ay! Ay!Will you be silent? Will you please to wait For my decree, you most untractable And boisterous citizens! Yes; I repeat, I framed that law myself, and will maintain it. But are you, Numitorius, here defendant? That title none but the reputed father Of the young woman has a right to---How Can I commit to thee what may appear The plaintiff's property; and, if not his, Still, is not thine? I'll give thee till to-morrow Ere I pass a final judgment---But the girl Remains with Claudius, who shall bind himself In such security as you require,  Who calls her
						daughter---This is my decree.A foul decree.---Shame! Shame!Ay, a most foul decree.A villanous decree.Most villanous.Good citizens, what do you with our weapons, When you should use your own? Your hands!---your hands! He shall not take her from us! Gather round her, And if he touch her, be it to his cost! And if ye see him touch her, never more Expect from us your titles---never more Be husbands, brothers, lovers, at our mouths, Or anything that doth imply the name  Of men---except such men asCommand your wives and daughters, citizens, They quit the Forum!They shall not command us, That care not to protect us!Take the girl, If she is yours.Stand by!O save me! save me!Virginia's voice!---Virginia! Take her, good Numitorius.You had better Withdraw, Icilius; the affair is judged.I claim my slave.Stand back, thou double slave! Touch her, and I will tear thee limb from limb, Before thy master's face.---She is my wife, My life, my heart, my heart's blood.---Touch her With but a look---My lictors, there, advance! See that Icilius quits the Forum.---Claudius, Secure your slave.Lictors, a moment pause For your own sakes! Do not mistake these arms! Think not the strength of any common man Is that they feel! They serve a charméd frame, The which a power pervades, that ten times trebles The natural energy of each single nerve To sweep you down as reeds.Obey my orders!Appius! before I quit the Forum, let me Address a word to you.Be brief, then!Brief!  Of the two
						strongest bulwarks to our liberties, Our tribunes and our privilege of appeal To the assembly of the people? Cannot The honour of the Roman maids be safe? Know, then, this virgin is betroth'd to me, Wife of my hope---Thou shalt not cross my hope And I retain my life---Attempt it not! I stand among my fellow-citizens--- His fellow-soldiers hem Virginius round, Both men and gods are on our side! But grant I stood alone, with nought but virtuous love To hearten me---alone would I defeat The execution of thy infamous Decree! I'll quit the Forum now, but not Alone!---My love! my wife! my free-born maid--- The virgin standard of my pride and manhood, Of peerless motto! rich, and fresh, and shining, And of device most rare and glorious! I'll bear off safe with me---unstain'd---untouch'd!Your duty, lictors---Claudius, look to your right!True citizens!Down with the traitor!Down with him---Slay him!So, friends! we thank you that you don't deprive us  At least their
						persons sacred---Their decrees, It seems, you value as you value straws, And in like manner break them. Wherefore stop When you have gone so far? You might, methinks, As well have kill'd my client, at my feet; As threaten'd him with death before my face! Rise, Claudius! I perceive Icilius' aim:--- He labours to restore the tribuneship By means of a sedition! We'll not give him The least pretence of quarrel. We shall wait Virginius's arrival till to-morrow. His friends take care to notice him---The camp's But four hours' journey from the city. Till To-morrow, then, let me prevail with you To yield up something of your right, and let The girl remain at liberty.If they Produce security for her appearance, I am content.I'll be your security.And I.We'll all be your security.My friends, And fellow-citizens, I thank you; but  If Claudius
						still persist---To-day I hope He will remain content with my security, And that of Numitorius, for the maid's Appearance.See she do appear!---and come Prepared to pay the laws more reverence, As I shall surely see that they receive it.Look up! look up! my sweet Virginia, Look up! look up! You will see none but friends. O that such eyes should e'er meet other object!Icilius! Uncle! lead me home! Icilius, You did not think to take a slave to wife?I thought, and think to wed a free-born maid; And thou, and thou alone, art she, Virginia!I feel as I were so---I do not think I am his slave! Virginius not my father! Virginius, my dear father, not my father! It cannot be; my life must come from him; For, make him not my father, it will go From me.---I could not live an he were not My father.Dear Virginia, calm thy thoughts--- But who shall warn Virginius?I've ta'en care  Than I despatch'd
						thy brother Lucius, Together with my son, to bring Virginius, With all the speed they could; and caution'd them--- As he is something over-quick of temper, And might snatch justice, rather than sue for it--- To evade communication of the cause, And merely say his presence was required, Till we should have him with us. Come, Virginia; Thy uncle's house shall guard thee, till thou find'st Within thy father's arms a citadel, Whence Claudius cannot take thee!He shall take A thousand lives first.Ay, ten thousand lives.Hear you, Virginia! Do you hear your friends? Let him takeTo be his slave then---if I am his
						slave!Thou art a free-born Roman maid, Virginia; All Rome doth know thee so, Virginia--- All Rome will see thee so.We will! We will!You'll meet us here to-morrow?Every man!Cease not to clamour 'gainst this outrage. Tell it  Let no man call himself a
						son of Rome Who stands aloof, when tyranny assails Her fairest daughter. Come, Virginia, 'Tis not a private, but a common wrong; 'Tis every father's, lover's, freeman's cause; To-morrow, fellow-citizens! to-morrow!To-morrow!Has he set out?He has, my Oppius, And never to return; his guard, instructed To take good care of him. There's not a man But's ten times sold to us, and of our wishes Fully possess'd. Dentatus will no more Obstruct us in our plans. He did not like The site of our encampment. He will find At least the air of it was wholesome.What Report are they instructed to bring back?They fell into an ambush---He was slain.But should the truth by any means ooze out?Imprison them, and secretly despatch them, Or ope the dungeon-doors, and let them 'scape.I should prefer the latter method.Well, That be our choice. But when it is determined To spill blood otherwise than as it may Be spill'd, to hesitate about some drops Is weakness, may be fatal.---Come, my friend, Let us be seen about the camp, and ready, With most admiring ear, to catch the tidings, Which all ears, save our own, will wonder at.  Well, friend, your news?Dentatus is no more; but he has dearly sold his life. The matter has been
						reported as you directed. By few it is received with credence---by many with
						doubt; while some bold spirits stop not at muttering, but loudly speak
						suspicion of foul play. A party that we met, a mile beyond the lines, no
						sooner heard our story, than they set off to bring the body to the camp.
						Others have followed them. Fabius, we have your gage for safety.You have.---Come, let us show ourselves.---Guilt hides, And we must wear the port of innocence, That walks abroad and looks its foes in the face.Where is Dentatus? Where is the gallant soldier? Ah, comrade! comrade! warm! yet warm! So lately Gone, when I would have given the world, only To say farewell to thee, or even get A parting look! O gallant, gallant soldier, The god of war might sure have spared a head Grown grey in serving him! My brave old comrade! The father of the field! Thy silver locks Other anointing should receive, than what Their master's blood could furnish!There has been treachery here!What!The slain are all our own. None of the
						bodies are stripp'd---These are all Romans. There is not the slightest trace
						of an enemy's retreat---And, now, that I remember, they made a sudden halt,
						when we came in sight of them at the foot of the mountain---Mark'd you not,
						too, with what confused haste they told their story, directed us, and
						hurried on to the camp?Revenge! The decemvirs! Ay, the decemvirs! For every drop of blood thou shalt have ten, Dentatus!Hoa! Virginius!Here! Who calls?What then? What then? Tell me the matter, Lucius.I have said It shall be told you.Shall! I stay not for That "shall," unless it be so close at hand It stop me not a moment.---'Tis too long A coming! Fare you well, my Lucius.Stay, Virginius; hear me then with patience.Well, I am patient.Your Virginia---Stop, my Lucius! I'm cold in every member of my frame!  Give me such token
						as her tomb would, Lucius--- I'll bear it better---Silence.You are still---I thank thee, Jupiter! I am still a father!You are, Virginius; yet---What, is she sick?No.Neither dead nor sick! All well! No harm! Nothing amiss! Each guarded quarter safe, That Fear may lay him down and sleep, and yet Still sounding the alarm! I swear thou tell'st A story strangely. Out with't! I have patience For anything, since my Virginia lives, And lives in health!You are required in Rome, To answer a most novel suit.Whose suit?The suit of Claudius.Claudius!Him that's client To Appius Claudius, the decemvir.What! That pander!---Ha!---Virginia!---You appear To couple them! What makes my fair Virginia  Beside lasciviousness!
						His suit! What suit?--- Answer me quickly!---Quickly! lest suspense, Beyond what patience can endure, coercing, Drive reason from her seat!He has claim'd Virginia.Claim'd her!---Claim'd her!--- On what pretence?He says she is the child Of a slave of his, who sold her to thy wife.Go on, you see I'm calm.He seized her in The school, and dragg'd her to the Forum, where Appius was giving judgment.Dragg'd her to The Forum! Well! I told you, Lucius, I would be patient.Numitorius there Confronted him.Did he not strike him dead?--- True, true, I know it was in presence of The decemvir.---O! had I confronted him!--- Well? well? The issue?---Well?---O'erleap all else, And light upon the issue! Where is she?I was despatch'd to fetch thee, ere I could learn. I see the
						master cloud!---This ragged one, That lowers before, moves only in subservience To the ascendant of the other---Jove, With its own mischief break it and disperse it, And that be all the ruin! Patience! Prudence! Nay, prudence, but no patience. Come!---A slave--- Dragg'd through the streets in open day! My child! My daughter! my fair daughter, in the eyes Of Rome! O, I'll be patient!---Come!---The essence Of my best blood in the free common ear Condemn'd as vile!---O, I'll be patient!---Come! O, they shall wonder---I will be so patient!Is he not yet arrived? Will he not come?He surely will.He surely will! More surely He had arrived already, had he known How he is wanted---They have miss'd him, Servia! Don't tell me, but I know they have, or surely We had not now been looking for him. Where's My uncle?Finding you had fallen asleep After such watching, he went forth to hear If there were any tidings of Virginius. He's here.Not come! not come! I am sure of it! He will not come! Do you not think he'll come? Will not my father come? What think you, uncle? Speak to me, speak---O give me any words, Rather than what looks utter!Be composed! I hope he'll come!A little while ago You were sure of it---from certainty to hope Is a poor step. You hope he'll come---One hope, One little hope to face a thousand fears! Do you not know he'll come? O uncle, wherefore  I had made sure
						of it!All has been done That could be done.Poor all, that does so little! One would imagine little needs be done To bring a father to the succour of His child! 'Tis near the time!It is indeed!Must I go forth with you? Must I again Be dragg'd along by Claudius, as his slave, And none again to succour me? Icilius! Icilius! Does your new betrothéd wife Call on you, and you hear not? My Icilius! Am I to be your wife, or Claudius' slave? Where---where are you, Icilius!My Virginia! What's to be done, my friend? 'tis almost time.I hear what you are saying---it is time--- O, who could have believed it, that Icilius Should ever say 'twas time to yield me to Another's claim---And will you give me up? Can you devise no means to keep me from him? Could we not fly? I see!---your pledge  Virginia!Is she here?Ah!My child! My child!I am! I feel I am! I know I am! My father! my dear father. I despair'd Of seeing you! You're come! and come in time. And, O! how much the more in time, when hope Had given you up. O! welcome, welcome foot, Whose wishéd step is heard when least expected!Brother! Icilius! thank you! thank you---All Has been communicated to me. Ay! And would they take thee from me? Let them try it! You've ta'en your measures well---I scarce could pass Along, so was I check'd by loving hands Ready to serve me---Hands with hearts in them! So thou art Claudius' slave? And if thou art, I'm surely not thy father! Blister'd villain! You have warn'd our neighbours, have you not, to attend As witnesses? To be sure you have! A fool To ask the question. Dragg'd along the streets too! 'Twas very kind in him to go himself And fetch thee---such an honour should not pass Without acknowledgment. I shall return it  Pray you be prudent, brother.Dear father, be advised---Will you not, father?I never saw you look so like your mother In all my life!You'll be advised, dear father?It was her soul---her soul, that play'd just then About the features of her child, and lit them Into the likeness of her own. When first She placed thee in my arms---I recollect it As a thing of yesterday!---she wish'd, she said, That it had been a man. I answer'd her, It was the mother of a race of men, And paid her for thee with a kiss. Her lips Are cold now---could they be but warm'd again, How they would clamour for thee!My dear father! You do not answer me! Will you not be advised?I will not take him by the throat and strangle him! But I could do it! I could do it! Fear not: I will not strike while any head I love Is in the way. It is not now a time To tell thee---but, wouldst thou believe it!---Honest Siccius Dentatus has been murder'd by them!Murder'd! O! how much Have we to fear!We have the less to fear! I spread the news at every step---A fire Is kindled, that will blaze at but a breath Into the fiercest flame!'Tis time. Let's haste To the Forum.Let the Forum wait for us! Put on no show of fear, when villany Would wrestle with you! It can keep its feet Only with cowards! I shall walk along Slowly and calmly, with my daughter thus In my hand---though with another kind of gripe Than that which Claudius gave her---Well, I say, I'll walk along thus, in the eyes of Rome. Go you before, and what appeal soe'er You please, make you to rouse up friends. For me, I shall be mute---my eloquence is here--- Her tears---her youth---her innocence---her beauty! If orators like these can't move the heart, Tongues surely may be dumb.A thousand hearts Have spoke already in her cause! Fear not! it is your father's grasp you feel. O he'll be strong as never man was yet, That takes thee from it. Come, Virginia; We trust our cause to Rome and to the gods!See you keep back the people! Use your fasces With firmer hands, or hearts. Your hands are firm Enough, would but your hearts perform their office, And leave your hands at liberty; not hang Upon them with unseemly fears and clamours! Look to it! Time! hadst thou the theme that I have For speed, thou wouldst not move this cripple's gait: But there's no urging thee, and thou wast ever Dull fellow-traveller to young Impatience, Dragging him back upon the road he pants To end, but cannot run without thee. Well?News has arrived, that speaks as if Dentatus Was murder'd by the order of your colleagues! There's not a face I meet but lowers with it: The streets are fill'd with thronging groups, that, as I pass'd, grew silent, and look'd sullen round, Then fell again to converse.'Tis ill-timed.What say you, Appius?Murder's ill-timed, I say, Happen when 'twill: but now is most ill timed, When Rome is in a ferment, on account Of Claudius, and this girl, he calls his slave;  All's laid to our
						account! Look out and see If Claudius be approaching yet. My wish, Like an officious friend, comes out of time To tell me of success. I had rather far The plot had fail'd. The waves run high enough; There needed not this squall on squall to raise them Above the present swell: But such a haven, If won, can never be too dearly won!Claudius is here!Well, Claudius, are the forces At hand?They are, and timely too! The people Are in unwonted ferment.Marcus says That news has come of old Dentatus' death; Which, as I hear, and wonder not to hear it, The mutinous citizens lay to our account!That's bad enough; yet---Ha! what's worse?'Tis best At once to speak what you must learn at last, Yet last of all would learn. Yes! He has arrived in Rome.They are coming, Appius! Fly, Marcus, hurry down the forces!Be not
						o'erwhelm'd!There's something awes me at The thought of looking on her father!Look Upon her, my Appius! Fix your gaze upon The treasures of her beauty, nor avert it Till they are thine. Haste! Your tribunal! Haste!Does no one speak? I am defendant here. Is silence my opponent? Fit opponent To plead a cause too foul for speech! What brow, In blank defiance both of gods and men, Is bold enough to back the knave, whose tongue Advanced the forgéd claim that stirs this suit To compass the dishonour of my child--- For that's the game!---and now the trial's come, Through shame or fear, has lost the power to wage And ope the villain pleadings!You had better, Virginius, wear another kind of carriage: This is not of the fashion that will serve you. The fashion
						it becomes a man to speak in, Whose property in his own child---the offspring Of his own body, near to him as is His hand, his arm---yea, nearer---closer far, Knit to his heart---I say, who has his property In such a thing, the very self of himself, Disputed---and I'll speak so, Appius Claudius; I'll speak so.---Pray you, tutor me!Stand forth, Claudius! If you lay claim to any interest In the question now before us, speak; if not Bring on some other cause.Most noble Appius---And are you the man That claims my daughter for his slave?---Look at me, And I will give her to thee.She is mine, then: Do I not look at you?Your eye does, truly, But not your soul.---I see it through your eye Shifting and shrinking---turning every way To shun me. You surprise me, that your eye, So long the bully of its master, knows not To put a proper face upon a lie,  When it would
						pass it off for truth. Your soul Dares as soon show its face to me.---Go on, I had forgot; the fashion of my speech May not please Appius Claudius.I demand Protection of the decemvir!You shall have it.Doubtless!Keep back the people, lictors! What's Your plea? You say the girl 's your slave---Produce Your proofs.My proof is here, which, if they can, Let them confront. The mother of the girl---Hold, brother! Hear them out, or suffer me To speak.Man, I must speak, or else go mad! And if I do go mad, what then will hold me From speaking? Wer't not better, brother, think you, To speak and not go mad, than to go mad And then to speak? She was thy sister, too! Well, well, speak thou. I'll try, and, if I can, Be silent.Will she swear she is her child?To be sure she will---a most wise
						question that!  Is she not his slave! Will his tongue lie for him---Or his hand steal---or the finger of his hand Beckon, or point, or shut, or open for him? To ask him if she'll swear---Will she walk or run, Sing, dance, or wag her head; do anything That is most easy done? She'll as soon swear! What mockery it is to have one's life In jeopardy by such a barefaced trick! Is it to be endured? I do protest Against her oath!No law in Rome, Virginius, Seconds you. If she swear the girl's her child, The evidence is good, unless confronted By better evidence. Look you to that, Virginius. I shall take the woman's oath.Icilius!Fear not, love; a thousand oaths Will answer her.You swear the girl's your child, And that you sold her to Virginius' wife, Who pass'd her for her own. Is that your oath?It is my oath.Your answer now, Virginius.Here it is! Is this the daughter of a slave? I know  The shoot
						you know the rank and order of The stem. Yet who from such a stem would look For such a shoot? My witnesses are these--- The relatives and friends of Numitoria, Who saw her, ere Virginia's birth, sustain The burden which a mother bears, nor feels The weight, with longing for the sight of it! Here are the ears that listen'd to her sighs In nature's hour of labour, which subsides In the embrace of joy!---the hands, that when The day first look'd upon the infant's face, And never look'd so pleased, help'd her up to it, And thank'd the gods for her, and pray'd them send Blessing on blessing on her.---Here, the eyes That saw her lying at the generous And sympathetic fount, that at her cry Sent forth a stream of liquid living pearl To cherish her enamell'd veins. The lie Is most abortive then, that takes the flower--- The very flower our bed connubial grew--- To prove its barrenness! Speak for me, friends; Have I not spoke the truth?You have, Virginius.Silence!---Keep silence there! No more of that!  Lictors, make way to let these troops advance. We've had a taste of your forbearance, masters, And wish not for another!Troops in the Forum!Virginius, have you spoken?If you have heard me, I have: if not, I'll speak again.You need not, Virginius; I have evidence to give, Which, should you speak a hundred times again, Would make your pleading vain.Your hand, Virginia! Stand close to me.My conscience will not let me Be silent. 'Tis notorious to you all, That Claudius' father, at his death, declared me The guardian of his son. This cheat has long Been known to me. I know the girl is not Virginius' daughter.Join your friends, Icilius, And leave Virginia to my care.The justice I should have done my client unrequired, Now cited by him, how shall I refuse? Nay, Virginius, I feel for you; but, though you were my father, The majesty of justice should be sacred--- Claudius must take Virginia home with him.And if he must, I should advise him, Appius, To take her home in time, before his guardian Complete the violation, which his eyes Already have begun---Friends! Fellow-citizens! Look not on Claudius---Look on your decemvir! He is the master claims Virginia! The tongues that told him she was not my child Are these---the costly charms he cannot purchase, Except by making her the slave of Claudius--- His client!---purveyor!---that caters for His pleasures---markets for him---picks, and scents, And tastes, that he may banquet---serves him up His sensual feast, and is not now ashamed, In the open, common street, before your eyes--- Frighting your daughters' and your matrons' cheeks With blushes they ne'er thought to meet---to help him To the honour of a Roman maid!---my child! Who now clings to me, as you see, as if This second Tarquin had already coil'd His arms around her. Look upon her, Romans!  Before her
						father's eyes!---He is but one! Tear her from Appius and his lictors, while She is unstain'd. Your hands! your hands! your hands!They're yours, Virginius.Keep the people back! Support my lictors, soldiers! Seize the girl, And drive the people back.Down with the slaves! Deserted!---Cowards! Traitors! Let me free But for a moment! I relied on you! Had I relied upon myself alone, I had kept them all at bay! I kneel to you--- Let me but loose a moment, if 'tis only To rush upon your swords!Icilius, peace! You see how 'tis! We are deserted, left Alone by our friends, surrounded by our enemies. Nerveless and helpless.Take Icilius hence; Away with him!Tyrant!---Virginia!Separate Virginius and the girl!---Delay not, slaves.Let them forbear awhile, I pray you, Appius:  Are tender, yet the
						hold is strong, by which She grasps me, Appius. Forcing them will hurt them. They'll soon unclasp themselves. Wait but a little: You know you're sure of her!I have not time To idle with thee; give her to my lictors.Appius, I pray you, wait! If she is not My child, she hath been like a child to me For fifteen years. If I am not her father, I have been like a father to her, Appius, For e'en so long a time. They that have lived For such a space together, in so near And dear society, may be allow'd A little time for parting! Let me take The maid aside, I pray you, to confer A moment with her nurse; perhaps she'll give me Some token, will unloose a tie, so twined And knotted round my heart, that if you break it So suddenly, my heart breaks with it!Well! Look to them, lictors!Do you go from me! Do you leave! Father! Father!No, my child;  Will you not leave me? Will you take me with you? Will you take me home again? O, bless you, bless you! My father! my dear father! Art thou not My father?This way, my Virginia! This way!Go We home?Don't fear! Don't fear, I am not going To leave thee, my Virginia! I'll not leave thee.Keep back the people, soldiers! Let them not Approach Virginius! Keep the people back! Well, have you done?Short time for converse, Appius; But I have.I hope you are satisfied.I am--- I am---that she is my daughter!Take her, lictors!Another moment, pray you. Bear with me A little---'Tis my last embrace. 'Twon't try Your patience beyond bearing, if you're a man! Lengthen it as I may, I cannot make it Long! My dear child! My dear Virginia! There is one only way to save thine honour---  Lo! Appius! with this innocent blood, I do devote thee to th' infernal gods! Make way there!Stop him! Seize him!If they dare To tempt the desperate weapon, that is madden'd With drinking my daughter's blood, why let them: thus It rushes in amongst them. Way there! Way!I do abjure all further league with them: They have most basely yielded up their power, And compromised their glory. Had they died In their high seats, they had lived demi-gods; But now they live to die like basest men! Power gone, life follows! Well! 'tis well we know The worst! The worst?---The worst is yet to come; And, if I err not, hither speeds a messenger Whose heel it treads upon! Well, Vibulanus?Honorius and Valerius are elected To the consulate.---Virginius is made tribune.No doubt they'd snatch their offices, when ours Were laid so poorly down. You have acted wisely!Who could resist Virginius, raving at The head of the revolted troops, with all The commons up in arms? Waste not dear time! Look to your safety, Appius. 'Tis resolved To cite you instantly before the consuls.Look to my safety, say you? You would bid A man, that's tumbling from a precipice A hundred fathoms high, and midway down, Look to his safety! What has he to snatch at? Air!---E'en so much have I.Withdraw awhile  And
						honours.Yes! You saw me on the brink--- Beheld it giving way beneath my feet--- And saw me tottering o'er the hideous leap, Whose sight sent round the brain with madd'ning whirl, With but a twig to stay me, which you cut, Because it was your friend that hung by it--- Most kindly!Nay, employ the present time In looking to your safety---that secured, Reproach us as you will.I am in your hands, Lead me which way you please.Hold! Stand!Icilius!Did I not tell you 'twas the tyrant? Look Was I not right? I felt that he was present Ere mine eye told it me.---You are our prisoner!On what pretence, Icilius?Ask of poor Virginius, tottering between despair And madness, as he seeks the home, where once He found a daughter!I demand due time  Demand due time! Appius!---Assign the cause, why you denied A Roman maid, of free condition, Her liberty provisionally, while Her plea remain'd unjudged. No answer, Appius? Lictors, lay hold upon him---to prison with him! Look to him well. To prison with the tyrant!Let all his friends, that their own safety prize, Solicit straight for his enlargement; doff Their marks of station, and to the vulgar eye Disguise it with the garb of mourning; 'twill Conciliate the crowd. We know them well: But humour them, they are water soon as fire!Is he not yet come home?Not since her death. I dread his coming home, good Lucius.A step! 'Tis Numitorius and Virginius.Gods! how he looks!---See, Lucius, how he looks!'Tis ease! 'Tis ease! I am content! 'Tis peace, 'Tis anything that is most soft and quiet. And after such a dream!---I want my daughter; Send me my daughter!Yes, his reason's gone. Scarce had he come in sight of his once sweet And happy home, ere with a cry he fell As one struck dead.---When to himself he came, We found him as you see. How is it, brother?How should it be but well? Our cause is good. Think you Rome will stand by, and see a man Robb'd of his child? We are bad enough, but yet They should not so mistake us. We are slaves, But not yet monsters.---Call my daughter to me. What keeps her thus? I never stepp'd within The threshold yet, without her meeting me With a kiss. She's very long a-coming. Call her!Icilius comes! See, my Icilius, see!Come, come, make ready. Brother, you and he  Ha!My Icilius, what a sight is there! Virginius' reason is a wreck, so stripp'd And broken up by wave and wind, you scarce Would know it was the gallant bark you saw Riding so late in safety!Father! Father! That art no more a father!Ha! what wet Is this upon my hand? A tear, boy! Fie, For shame! Is that the weapon you would guard Your bride with? First essay what steel can do!Not a tear has bless'd his eye since her death! No wonder. The fever of his brain, that now burns out, Has drunk the source of sorrow's torrents dry.You would not have it otherwise? 'Twas fit The bolt, that struck the sole remaining branch, And blasted it, should set the trunk on fire!If we could make him weep---Her urn! 'Twas that which first drew tears from me. I'll fetch it. Yet scarcely think it wise, to wake a man Who's at the mercy of a tempest! Better You suffer him to sleep it through. Dentatus'
						murder!---Screw the chord of rage To the topmost pitch!---Mine own is not mine own! That's strange enough. Why does he not dispute My right to my own flesh, and tell my heart Its blood is not its own? He might as well! But I want my child!Justice will be defeated.Who says that? He lies in the face of the gods! She is immutable, Immaculate, and immortal!---and though all The guilty globe should blaze, she will spring up Through the fire, and soar above the crackling pile, With not a downy feather ruffled by Its fierceness!He is not himself! What new Oppression comes to tell us to our teeth. We only mock'd ourselves to think the days Of thraldom past?The friends of Appius Beset the people with solicitations. The fickle crowd, that change with every change, Begin to doubt and soften. Every moment That's lost, a friend is lost. Appear among Your friends, or lose them! Remain, and watch Virginius.You remember, Don't you, nurse?What, Virginius?That she nursed The child herself! Inquire among your gossips, Which of them saw it; and, with such of them As can avouch the fact, without delay Repair to the Forum! Will she come or not? I'll call myself!---She will not dare!---O when Did my Virginia dare---Virginia! Is it a voice, or nothing answers me? I hear a sound so fine---there's nothing lives 'Twixt it and silence! Aha! She is not here! They told me she was here---they have deceived me; And Appius was not made to give her up, But keeps her, and effects his wicked purpose, While I stand talking here, and ask you if My daughter is my daughter! Though a legion Sentried that brothel, which he calls his palace, I'd tear her from him!Hold, Virginius! Stay! Appius is now in prison. He has secured her there! Ha! has he so? Gay office for a dungeon! Hold me not, Or I will dash you down, and spoil you for My keeper. My Virginia, struggle with him! Appal him with thy shrieks; ne'er faint, ne'er faint! I am coming to thee! I am coming to thee!From the palace to the dungeon is a road Trod oft---not oft retrod. What hope have I To pace it back again? I know of none. I am as one that's dead! The dungeon, that Encloses fallen greatness, may as well Be call'd its tomb. I am as much the carcass Of myself, as if the string were taken from My neck. Their hands long for the office! Oh, 'Tis worth the half of a plebeian's life To get his greasy fingers on the throat Of a patrician! But I'll balk them. Come! Appius shall have an executioner No less illustrious than himself. Who's there?Your friend!My Vibulanus!Appius, what Was that, you hid in such confusion, as I enter'd?'Tis a draught for life, which swallow'd, She relishes so richly, that she cares not If she ne'er drink again! Here's health to you!Not out of such a cup as that, my Appius. Despair, that bids you drink it, as the cure  Your eyes from
						hope, that even now stands ready With outstretch'd arms to rush to your embrace. Your friends are busy for you with your foes! Your foes become your friends! Where'er a frown Appears against you, nothing's spared to make The wearer doff it, and put up a smile In its stead. Your colleague Oppius is in prison. Your client too. Their harm's your safety: it Distracts the appetite o' the dogs. They drop The morsel they took up before, as soon As a new one's thrown to them.Thou givest me life Indeed!That I may give thee life indeed, I'll waste no longer time with thee; for that Already taken to assure thee of Thy fast-reviving fortunes, cheats them of The aid should help to re-establish them. Farewell, my Appius! If my absence takes A friend from thee, it leaves one with thee---Hope!And I will clasp it to me! Never friend Made sweeter promises! But snatch me from Beneath the feet of the vile herd, that's now Broke loose and roams at large; I'll show them who  Thou art a
						friend that promises, but cares not To keep his word. This once keep thine with Appius, And he will give thee out so true a tongue, Thy word is bond enough!---At liberty. Again at liberty! O give me power As well, for every minute of my thraldom I'll pick a victim from the common herd Shall groan his life in bondage. Liberty! 'Tis triumph, power, dominion, everything! Are ye not open yet, ye servile gates? Let fall your chains, and push your bolts aside! It is your past and future lord commands you!Give me my daughter!Ha!My child! my daughter! My daughter! my Virginia! Give her me!Thy daughter!Ay! Deny that she is mine, And I will strangle thee, unless the lie Should choke thee first.Thy daughter!Play not with me! Provoke me not! Equivocate, and lo! Thou sport'st with fire. I am wild!---distracted!---mad!---  For all, I
						want my child, and I will have her; So give her to me.Caged with a madman! Hoa! Without there!Not a step thou stirr'st from hence, Till I have found my child. Attempt that noise Again, and I will stop the vent, that not A squeak shall pass it. There are plugs for you  Will keep it air-tightMy
						daughter.In truth, she is not here, Virginius; Or I would give her to thee.Would! Ay, should! Though would were would not. Do you say, indeed, She is not here? You nothing know of her?Nothing, Virginius! good Virginius, nothing.How if I thrust my hand into your breast, And tore your heart out, and confronted it With your tongue? I'd like it!---Shall we try it? Fool! Are not the ruffians leagued? The one would swear To the tale o' the other.By the gods, Virginius, Your daughter is not in my keeping.Well,  That I had
						murder'd her---'Tis false! 'twas but A dream.---She isn't here, you say---Well! well! Then I must go and seek her elsewhere---Yet She's not at home---and where else should I seek her But there or here? Here! here! here! Yes, I say, But there or here---I tell you I must find her--- She must be here, or what do you here? What, But such a wonder of rich beauty could Deck out a dungeon so, as to despoil A palace of its tenant? Art thou not The tyrant Appius?---Didst thou not decree My daughter to be Claudius' slave, who gave her To his master? Have you not secured her here To compass her dishonour, ere her father Arrives to claim her?No!Do you tell me so? Vile tyrant! Think you, shall I not believe My own eyes before your tongue? Why, there she is! There, at your back---her looks dishevell'd and Her vestment torn! Her cheeks all faded with Her pouring tears, as flowers with too much rain! Her form no longer kept and treasured up By her maiden pride, like a rich casket, cast  The richer gem was
						shrined in it is lost! Villain! is this a sight to show a father? And have I not a weapon to requite thee? Ha! here are ten!Keep down your hands! Help! help!No other look but that! Look on! look on! It turns my very flesh to steel---Brave girl! Keep thine eye fix'd---let it not wink---look on!Not here!Is this the dungeon?---Appius is not here, Nor yet Virginius. You have sure mistaken.This is the dungeon---Here Virginius enter'd.Yet is not here!---Hush! The abode of death Is just as silent. Gods! should the tyrant take The father's life, in satisfaction for The deed that robb'd him of the daughter's charms--- Hush! hark! A groan! There's something stirs!'Tis this way!Come on! Protect him, gods, or pardon me If with my own hand I revenge his death.What's here? Virginius! with the tyrant prostrate and dead!His senses are benumb'd! There is no adit to his mind, by which our words
						can reach it. Help to raise him. The motion may recall perception.His eye is not so deathlike fixed; it moves a little.Speak to him, Numitorius; he knows your voice the best.Virginius!I think he heeds you; speak again.Virginius!Ah!That sigh has burst the spell which held him.Virginius! my dear brother!Lighter! lighter! My heart is ten times lighter! What a load it has heaved
						off! Where is he? I thought I had done it.Virginius!Well, who are you? What do you want? I'll answer what I've done!Do you not know me, brother? Speak, Icilius, try if he knows you.Virginius!Try again. Virginius!That voice---that voice---I know that voice! It minds me of a voice was coupled with it, And made such music, once to hear it was Enough to make it ever after be Remember'd! Ha! What's this?Virginia!Leaving the common path, which many tread,We will not wake with jokes our poet dead; Nor shame the young creations of his pen, By bidding all, who've perish'd, be again. The pale Virginia, in her bloody shroud, Lies like a shrinéd saint.---Oh! then, aloud Shall we break scurril jests, and bid depart Those thoughts of her, which fill and teach the heart? No moral now we offer, squared in form, But Pity, like the sun-light, bright and warm, Comes mix'd with showers; and, fading, leaves behind A beauty and a blossom on the mind. We do not strain to show that "thus it grows." And "hence we learn" what everybody knows: But casting idle dogmas (words) aside, We paint a villain in his purple pride; And tearing down a power, that grew too bold, Show---merely what was done in days of old. Leaving this image on the soul, we go Unto our gentler story touch'd with woe (With woe that wantons not, nor wears away The heart), and love too perfect for decay. But whatsoe'er we do, we will not shame Your better feeling, with an idle game Of grin and mimicry (a loathsome task); Or strip the great Muse of her mighty mask, And hoot her from her throne of tears and sighs, Until from folly and base jest she dies. No; let her life be long, her reign supreme--- If but a dream, it is a glorious dream.Dwell then upon our tale; and bear along With you, deep thoughts---of love---of bitter wrong--- Of freedom---of sad pity---and lust of pow'r. The tale is fitted for an after-hour.