Ah, Messer Paolo, a good morrow to thee! The streets are full to-day. I have not seen Such an out-pouring of our Roman hive Since the last jubilee. Whence comes the swarm? The stirring Ursini, on a hot canvass For their proud chief, the factious Martin.He, Our senator! a proper ruler! sick, too, And like to die.Nay, he were harmless, then. But ’tis his brother, John, of Ursini, The subtle John, that drives this business onward.A proper ruler! Martin Ursini, That seized the Widow Landi’s house, to make A kennel for his hounds—that carried off The pretty child, Emilia Fano—none Hath e’er beheld her since.’Twas likelier John! The dark, smooth, subtle John. He’s the prime mover Of these iniquities.Ye have bold tongues.Art thou of their black faction?No; I ply My trade, and hold my peace.Stephen Colonna
                  Should have been senator.No—he’s too old:The Count Savelli, or young Angelo.’Tis ill to choose between them.Ay, and dangerous To meddle with such great ones. Dost not see A man in yonder porch?Our honest neighbour, Cola Rienzi, poring o’er some stone With legend half defac’d. Thou knowest Cola?A follower of the Colonna?Ay:He haunts their palace, and, with rancorous hate, Pursues the Ursini. Didst never hear How his young brother, poor Antonio, fell,Murdered by their base groom? He hates the Ursini; And follows the Colonna, scarce for love, Rather to feast his learned spleen—for Cola
                  Is a ripe scholar—with sharp-biting gibesAnd dark predictions: a rank malcontent—A bitter railer.He approaches.
                     Cola,What dragg’st thou there? a stone?A mouldering stone! An earth-encrusted stone!A tombstone?Ay—Fit emblem of our city. Here be words,An’ ye could read them,—words whose sense is dead Even as the tongue. Did ye ever hear the sound Of liberty—of country? Back to earth, Rebellious stone! Back! back! thou preachest treasonTreason to the Ursini! What will thy patrons, The proud Colonna, say to this new power?My patrons!—Oh, they’ll fight! they’ll fight!—They’ll pour Their men at arms into our streets, and wage Fierce battle; burn and plunder, spoil and slay Guilty or innocent, or friend or foe:Their nature, sirs, their noble nature.Well, And we? What is our fate, sir prophet?We! Whichever wheel turn round, we shall be crushed Between the millstones. That’s our destiny,—The destiny we earn.He’s right. The barons
                  Make an arena of the city, vexing Our quiet streets with brawls; plundering and killing The peaceful citizens. Even the Colonna,—Albeit Stephen be a thought more brave, And Angelo more kind,—even the Colonna
                  Are tyrants to the people.Yet the yoke Must be endured.Must! Be ye men?Why,Cola,What should we do?Talk, talk, my masters! Speech Is your fit weapon. Talk! Women and slaves So drown the rattle of their chains. Talk! talkAnd tell in gentle whispers, gazing round, Lest other listeners than the storied walls Of these old temples hear ye, how on Monday A noble gallant, one of the Corsi, stole,— Seized is the courtlier phrase,—and wrung the neck Of Adriani’s falcon, a famed bird, Unmatched in Italy,—the poor old man Weeps as it were his child,—or how, on Tuesday, Black John, of
                     Ursini, spurred his hot courserRight through a band of pious pilgrims, journeying To our lady of Loretto,—marry, two Are lamed for life!—Or how, on Wednesday—Stop—I can go through the week.But, for the pilgrims,—Art sure of that foul sacrilege?As sure As that thou standest there; as that the Ursini
                  Parade the city.Distant shouts, R . Hark! do ye not hearThe shouting mob approach?—Sure as that ye Who frown, and lift your eyes, and shake your heads,And look aghast at such foul sacrilege,Will join your voice to that base cry, and shout,Long live the Ursini! I know ye, masters.
                     Cola, thou wrong’st us.If I wrong ye—no! Ye are Italians; men of womanish soul, Faint, weak, emasculate: the generous wrath Of the manly Roman, with his lofty tongue,Lies buried—not for ever.Nearer shouts, R. Hark! Here comesThe tyrant of to-day. Go, swell his train. I’ll to my porch again, and feed my spirit On these mute marbles.A brave man.Full surely,A dangerous.Thanks, gentle friends. To the Lords.Yes, I expect to-morrowA packet from Avignon; even Colonna
                  Will bow to Clement’s mandate.If he do not—Oh, never doubt; if he refuse, why, then— Doubt him not,Frangipani. Quicker, friends,— I hurry ye, my lords, but we are waited At the Alberteschi Palace. Follow fast.Live John of Ursini!Why, what a sort of sullen citizens Be here, that shout not! Doff thy
                     bonnet, man!Look at thy fellows! doff thy cap.Good friend—What, must I be thy tireman?Down, vile minion! Hath the slave harmed thee, Paolo?—Art thou hurt? Look where the abject tyrant licks the dust. The very stones of Rome cast back the load Of his foul carcass!—yet he stirs! I’m glad The reptile is not dead.Fly, Cola!Fly!To the Colonna Palace,—they will shield thee From danger or pursuit. This is no time For thanks. Fly,Cola!Let them fly that fear. Fly! why the evil-doer flies, not he That putteth down a wrong. Fly! I would call
                     Rome, universal Rome, to view this deed,The type of that to come. Yon creeping slave, Struck with the strong brute force of power—fellBefore my weaker arm, nerved by the spirit Of righteous indignation. So shall fall Tyrants and tyranny. Meet me to-night On the Capitoline Hill. Now I can trust ye, Now that the man is roused within your souls, The Roman ardour.One is gone.Well, well, A milder breeze had severed such light chaff From the sound corn. Yon slave—he lives—he stirs.I’ll take him to my house.And I, to-morrow, Will find a fitter hospital. Farewell! Remember midnight,—at the Capitol! Remember!Beseech thee, now, away, Lord Angelo,—Thou hast been here o’erlong.Scarce whilst the sand Ran through the tell tale glass; scarce whilst the sun Lengthened the shadow of the cedar.See! The sun is setting—see.Scarce, whilst I said A thousand times—I love.Look to the sun.I had rather gaze on thee.And think how long We sate beneath the myrtle shade, how long Paced the cool trellis-walk. When next thou steal’st Hither, from thy proud palace, I must time thee By seconds, as the nice physician counts The boundings of the fevered pulse. Away, Dear Angelo; think, if my father find thee—Oh, talk not of him, sweet! why was I born The heir of the Colonna? why art thou 
                     Rienzi’s daughter? What a world of foes, Stern scorn, and fiery pride, and cold contempt, Are ranged betwixt us twain; yet love, and time— Be faithful, mine own Claudia—time, and love!Alas, alas!Thy father loves thee, sweetest,With a proud dotage, almost worshipping The idol it hath framed. Thou fear’st not him?Alas! I have learned to fear him; he is changed, Grievously changed; still good and kind, and full Of fond relentings—crossed by sudden gusts Of wild and stormy passion. I have learnedA daughter’s trembling love. Then, he’s so silent— He once so eloquent. Of old, each show, Bridal, or joust, or pious pilgrimage,Lived in his vivid speech. Oh! ’twas my joy,In that bright glow of rapid words, to see Clear pictures, as the slow procession coiled Its glittering length, or stately tournament Grew statelier, in his voice. Now he sits mute—His serious eyes bent on the ground—each sense Turned inward.Somewhat chafes his ardent spirit.And should I grieve him, too? Lord Angelo, The love deserves no blessing, that deceives A father.Mine own Claudia!We must part.Oh, never talk of parting! ’Twas Rienzi
                  That brought me hither first. Rememberest thouA boy, scarce more than boy—thy lovely self Scarce woman. Then was thy rare beauty stamped,At once, within my heart,—then, and for ever. Thou canst not bid me leave thee, love, and time,And constancy—oh, be as faithful, Claudia, As thou art fair!
                     Camillo!Hence, begone!
                     Camillo!’Tis his voice—away, away! Here, through the lattice—by the garden-gate. Now Heaven forgive me, if it be a sin To love thee, Angelo. Looking after him. My foolish heartBeats an’ it were. He’s gone—he’s hidden now Behind the myrtle-hedge: thank Heaven, thank Heaven! He’s opening now the gate—I hear the key— But my sense is fear-quickened: now ’tis closed,And all is safe. Sinks down into the chair, R. Oh, simple heart, be still,Be still.Camillo, see that thou admit Only Alberti.None, save him?None. Claudia!
                     Claudia, I say! She trembles at the sound Of her own name, and flutters like a bird Fresh caught, as I approach. It likes me ill To scare thee thus, fair daughter. Time has been,When thou hast listened for me—when my voice,Half a street off—my footstep on the causeway—Would bring my little 
                     handmaid, springing forthWith eager service, to fling wide the door, And seize my cloak. 
                        Claudia rises hastily to take his cloak. Nay, nay, I need thee not.Oh, let me take it, father!Sit thee down, And ply thy sewing.
                        Claudia sits R., and takes up the skein of ravelled worsted. Hath Alberti—no—The west is glowing still. Hark ye, fair mistress:Crossing the hall but now, I saw a shadow Upon the garden wall, as clearly traced,By the sun’s parting rays, as I see thee Weaving fresh tangles in that ravelled skein,Which thou affect’st to wind. He must have passed By yonder open lattice. Art thou dumb? Didst thou not see him,Claudia? him whose shadow Darkened the sunny wall?Perchance, Camillo.
                     Camillo! old Camillo! when I told thee I saw him plainly as thyself:—the form Erect and stately; the proud head thrown back Crested with waving plumes. Perchance, Camillo! 
                     Claudia, with thine old Roman name, I gave thee Precepts that might have made thee simply great,As ever maiden of old Rome. Camillo! Wouldst thou deceive thy father? Pay’st thou thus His love, his trust, his doting pride?Oh, no! No, no! I’ll tell thee all: forgive me, father,Only forgive me!—Thou shalt hear—Not now,Not now, my Claudia; cheer thee, sweet! I’ll hear Thy tale some fitter season. Wipe thine eyes. If I’ve been harsh with thee, ’twas love, my Claudia,— Love of my fairest daughter, and vexed thoughts Of this oppressed city. Sit thee, sweet! All is at peace between us: weep no more,My Claudia.This is joy.I had been chafed By one of yon base minions. But the hour Of vengeance comes.Of vengeance!Say, of freedom:Dost tremble at the sound?Oh, father, each Alike is terrible; for each brings war,Fierce desperate war.
                     Claudia, in these bad days, When man must tread perforce the flinty path Of duty, hard and rugged, fail not thou Duly at night and morning to give thanks To the all-gracious power that smoothed the way For woman’s tenderer feet. She but looks on,And waits and prays for the good cause, whilst man Fights, struggles, triumphs, dies. Vex not thy mind With thoughts of state, my dear one; there’s no danger:All whom thou lov’st are safe; all, silly trembler. Peace, peace! I will not hear thee: all are safe. 
                     Alberti, welcome. 
                        Rienzi and Claudia rise. Be the scrolls affixedOn churches, at street-corners, in the markets? Art sure of the soldiers? Dost thou hold the watch? Thine answer in a word.In one word, yes. All is prepared. I’m waited at the castle;Yet hearken, Cola; I saw Count Savelli, 
                     Colonna’s kinsman, conning yon bold summons:Thou hadst best avoid him.Nay, confront him, rather:I’ll to their palace, meet them, baffle them.Hast heard aught of the Ursini?They feast High and elate within their halls.Yon wretch Was not even missed. Poor slave, he shall be cared for. Now, for the last time—Simple child, in, in! Lay all thy cares to rest. In, in, my child! Bless thee, my Claudia! my fair Claudia!Puts her gently off, R. NowFor Rome and Freedom.What,Martin Ursini our senator! An Ursini, and of that hated race The most abhorred, the worst. He chief of Rome! Sick, too. Tush! tush!The tale is rife,Colonna; And, as I passed his palace, glancing lights And sudden shouts and merry music spake The high and liberal feasting which foreruns Expected triumph.
                     Martin Ursini
                  Head of the state! and the Colonna fallen Beneath their rival’s feet! His wanton vassals, The meanest horseboys of his train, will spurn My belted knights. Cousin, we must away To Palestrina, and array in force Our men at arms: they will be needed.Fie! These brawls match ill with thy white hairs.Good wife, Wouldst have me turn a craven in mine age, A by-word to mine enemies?Art thou not Stephen Colonna, of that greatest name The greatest? Which of these, proud Ursini,May match with thee in fame? But thy old wreaths Were won in nobler fields. These private feuds Are grown a crying evil.Count Savelli!A fair good evening, noble dame. Colonna
                  Hear’st thou the news?Of Martin Ursini?Nay, that were common, stale, and trivial. See,I bring ye tidings of rebellion, sirs; High tidings! stirring tidings! prompt rebellionHeaded—I pr’ythee guess.Rare food for mirth, If we may judge by look and tone. The wives Of Rome revolted; or the husbands risen Against their gentle dames.’Tis a brief summons, Fiery, but scholarly, stern, bold, and plain,—Calling the citizens to meet to-night And win their freedom. Such a scroll as this Is fixed in every street.How signed?Guess! guess! There lies the mirth: ye’ll never guess—read here.What, Cola di Rienzi! honest Cola, Who saves Colonna here a jester’s charge, A fool without the bells. Honest Rienzi! ’Tis a device of the black Ursini.Likelier some freak of Cola’s. He hath turned A bitter knave of late, and lost his mirth,And mutters riddling warnings and wild tales Of the great days of heathen Rome; and prates Of peace, and liberty, and equal law, And mild philosophy, to us the knights And warriors of this warlike age, who rule By the bright law of arms. The fool’s grown wise—A grievous change.I ever thought him so: A sad wise man, of daring eye, and free, Yet mystic speech. When ye have laughed, I still Have shuddered for his darkling words, oft fell Like oracles, answering with dim response To my unspoken thoughts, so that my spirit, Albeit unused to womanish fear, hath quail’d To hear his voice’s deep vibration. Watch him! Be sure, he is ambitious.—Watch him, lords:—— He hath o’erleapt the barrier, poverty;Hath conquered his mean parentage; hath clomb To decent station, to high lettered fame;—The pontiff’s notary, the honoured friend Of Petrarch. Watch him well.Tush, tush! Rienzi— Cola Rienzi—honest Cola, rise ’Gainst us! Fair wife, I deemed thee wiser.—They Who plot are silent. Would we were as sure Of Martin Ursini! What says Avignon? The holy father hath not joined the faction?I know not, but the cardinals, his uncles, Are powerful with Pope Clement.All the race, Churchmen or laic, old or young, have craftVeined in their stony hearts—the master-streak Of that cold marble. Of the cardinals, 
                     Gaetano is a soldier-priest, but wary, And politic as valiant; Annibal, A meek soft-spoken monk, who, crawling, climbs Ambition’s loftiest ladder. Of the nephews,Despatch them at a stroke,—say they’re thy foes.Why, master Cola—Say they are thy foes.Art thou their friend? I have heard talk of wrongs Thou hast suffered from the Ursini.Ay, ay—A trifle of a life—a foolish brother Killed in a midnight brawl. Your privilege,Your feudal privilege! ye slay our brethren, And we—we kiss the sword. This Martin Ursini—What of the knavish ruffian?Mend thy phrase— Shall ne’er be senator,—yet mend thy phrase;Bespeak him fair; ye may be friends.Friends?Ay; A day will come, when I shall see ye joined In a close league.Joined! by what tie?By hatred—By danger—the two hands that tightest grasp Each other—the two cords that soonest knit A fast and stubborn tie: your true-love knot Is nothing to it. Faugh! the supple touch Of pliant interest, or the dust of time, Or the pin-point of temper, loose, or rot,Or snap love’s silken band. Fear and old hate,They are sure weavers—they work for the storm,The whirlwind, and the rocking surge; their knot Endures till death. Ye will be friends, I tell thee—Ere yon inconstant moon hath waxed and waned, Ye will be friends. Yet Martin Ursini
                  Shall ne’er be senator.Why, master prophet,Men say thou shalt be senator, or king,Or emperor. Hast read the scroll? when goest thou To head thy rebel band! See! see!“At midnight.—”Well, I come here to while away the time Till that dread hour.—“Upon the Capitol.”--Look that ye set forth scouts and men at arms To sieze the chiefs, and chase the multitude, Like sheep before the dogs. Ye were best send To man the castlewalls, and triply guard.— Who is the captain of the watch?
                     Alberti.Ha, mine old friend! I counsel ye, my lords, Seize me, and crush this great rebellion; meCola Rienzi, honest Cola! Laugh ye? An honest man hath played the rogue, ere now.—Witness this scroll.A scurvy jest!A jest! Call it a jest, and ’tis a mockery Of all that, in this worn-out world, survives Of great and glorious.—The eternal power Lodged in the will of man, the hallowed names Of freedom and of country!—If a truth—What, if a truth?Then—Where is Angelo,Crossing to Lady C.
                     Thy goodly son, Madonna?Dost thou seek A full-fledged gallant, and so gayly plumed, Here, in his parent nest? If thou wouldst meet The rover, go where Mandolines are heard,Beneath coy beauty’s lattice. Count Savelli
                  Has a fair daughter.I have heard him praise 
                     Bianca Ursini.An Ursini!Calm thee, Colonna. Rest thee sure thy son Will never stain thy honour’d name—will never Forget his proud obedience.Say’st thou so?With a glad certainty.Look to him, then.—Yet, watch him as thou may, against thy will He shall espouse the fairest maid in Rome; The fairest and the greatest.And as good As she is great, and innocent as fair?Even to the crowning of a poet’s dream;Gentle, and beautiful, and good.—Yet, mark me—Against thy will! I said against thy will!Hear’st thou? Calling after Rienzi. 
                     He’s gone?Dear lady, think no more Of this wild prophecy.Nay, I am sure Of Angelo. Why dost thou seek thy sword? Thou goest not forth so late, good husband?Yes:The night is fair,—I shall take horse at once For Palestrina; thence to Avignon. We’ll bide some struggle with these Ursini. Will ye ride with me, kinsmen?Joyfully.I’ll wait ye to the court.—Yet, once again,Beware Rienzi!This is the chosen spot. A brave assemblage!Why, yes. No marvel that Rienzi struck So bold a blow. I had heard shrewd reports Of heats, and discontents, and gathering bands, But never dream’d of Cola.’Tis the spot! Where loiters he? The night wears on apace.It is not yet the hour.Who speaks?
                     Alberti, The captain of the guard; he, and his soldiers,Have joined our faction.Comrades, we shall gain An easy victory. The Ursini, Drunk with false hope and brute debauch, feast high Within their palace. Never wore emprise A fairer face.And yet the summer heaven, Sky, moon, and stars, are overcast. The saints Send that this darkness—Darkness! did ye never Watch the dark glooming of the thunder-cloud,Ere the storm burst? We’ll light this darkness, sir, With the brave flash of spear and sword.
                     Rienzi! Live, brave Rienzi! honest Cola!Friends!Long live Rienzi!Listen to him.Friends,I come not here to talk. Ye know too well The story of our thraldom. We are slaves! The bright sun rises to his course, and lights A race of slaves!—He sets, and his last beam Falls on a slave: not such as, swept along By the full tide of power, the conqueror leads To crimson glory and undying fame; But base ignoble slaves,—slaves to a horde Of petty tyrants, feudal despots; lords Rich in some dozen paltry villages,—Strong in some hundred spearmen,—only great In that strange spell—a name. Each hour, dark fraud, Or open rapine, or protected murder, Cry out against them. But this very day, An honest man, my neighbour,—Pointing to Paolo, R. corner.—there he stands,—Was struck,—struck like a dog, by one who wore The badge of Ursini; because, forsooth, He tossed not high his ready cap in air, Nor lifted up his voice in servile shouts,At sight of that great ruffian. Be we men,And suffer such dishonour? Men, and wash not The stain away in blood? Such shames are common: I have known deeper wrongs. I that speak to ye, I had a brother once, a gracious boy,Full of all gentleness, of calmest hope,—Of sweet and quiet joy—“there was the look Of heaven upon his face, which limners give To the beloved disciple.” How I loved That gracious boy! Younger by fifteen years, Brother at once and son!” He left my side;A summer bloom on his fair cheeks,—a smile Parting his innocent lips.” In one short hour The pretty harmless boy was slain! I saw The corse, the mangled corse, and when I cried For vengeance!—Rouse, ye Romans!—Rouse, ye slaves! Have ye brave sons?—Look in the next fierce brawl To see them die. Have ye fair daughters?—Look To see them live, torn from your arms, distained, Dishonoured; and, if ye dare call for justice, Be answered by the lash. Yet, this is Rome,That sate on her seven hills, and from her throne Of beauty ruled the world! Yet, we are Romans.Why, in that elder day, to be a Roman
                  Was greater than a king! And once again,— Hear me, ye walls, that echoed to the treadOf either Brutus!once again, I swear,The eternal city shall be free; her sons Shall walk with princes. Ere to-morrow’s dawn,The tyrants—Hush! Who passes there?A foe,By his proud bearing. Seize him.As I deem, ’Tis Angelo Colonna. Touch him not,—I would hold parley with him. Good Alberti, The hour is nigh. Away! Now, sir!What be ye,That thus in stern and watchful mystery Cluster beneath the veil of night, and start To hear a stranger’s foot?
                     Romans.And wherefore Meet ye, my countrymen?For freedom.Surely, Thou art Cola di Rienzi?Ay, the voice,—The traitor voice.I knew thee by the words. Who, save thyself, in this bad age, when man Lies prostrate like yon temple, dared conjoin The sounds of Rome and freedom?I shall teach The world to blend those words, as in the days Before the Caesars. Thou shalt be the first To hail the union. I have seen thee hang On tales of the world’s mistress, till thine eyes Flooded with strong emotion, have let fall Big tear-drops on thy cheeks, and thy young hand Hath clenched thy maiden sword. Unsheath it now,—Now, at thy country’s call! What, dost thou pause? Is the flame quenched? Dost falter? Hence with thee, Pass on! pass whilst thou may!Hear me, Rienzi. Even now my spirit leaps up at the thought Of those brave storied days—a treasury Of matchless visions, bright and glorified, Paling the dim lights of this darkling world With the golden blaze of heaven; but past and gone,As clouds of yesterday, as last night’s dream.A dream! Dost see yon phalanx, still and stern? An hundred leaders, each with such a band, So armed, so resolute, so fixed in will, Wait with suppressed impatience till they hearThe great bell of the Capitol, to spring At once on their proud foes. Join them.My father!Already he hath quitted Rome.My kinsmen!We are too strong for contest. Thou shalt see No other change within our peaceful streets Than that of slaves to freemen. Such a change As is the silent step from night to day, From darkness into light. We talk too long.Yet reason with them;—warn them.And their answer—Will be the goal, the gibbet, or the axe, The keen retort of power. Why, I have reasoned;And, but that I am held, amongst your great ones, Half madman and half fool, these bones of mine Had whitened on yon wall. Warn them! They met At every step dark warnings. The pure air, Where’er they passed, was heavy with the weight Of sullen silence; friend met friend, nor smiled, Till the last footfall of the tyrant’s steed Had died upon the ear; and low and hoarse Hatred came murmuring like the deep voice Of the wind before the tempest. Sir, the boys,—The unfledged boys, march at their mothers’ hist,Beside their grandsires; even the girls of Rome,—The gentle and the delicate, array Their lovers in this cause. I have one yonder,
                     Claudia Rienzi,—thou hast seen the maid— A silly trembler, a slight fragile toy, As ever nursed a dove, or reared a flower,—Yet she, even she, is pledged—To whom? to whom?To Liberty. Was never virgin vowed In the fair temple over right our house To serve the goddess, Vesta, as my child Is dedicate to Freedom. A king’s son Might kneel in vain for Claudia. None shall wed her,Save a true champion of the cause.I’ll join ye:How shall I swear?Friends, comrades, countrymen! I bring unhoped-for aid. Young Angelo,The immediate heir of the Colonna, craves To join your band.He’s welcome!Hear me swear By Rome—by freedom—by Rienzi! Comrades,How have ye titled your deliverer? consul—Dictator, emperor?Consul! Emperor! &c. &c.No:Those names have been so often steeped in blood, So shamed by folly, so profaned by sin, The sound seems ominous,—I’ll none of them. Call me the tribune of the people; there My honouring duty lies. Hark—the bell, the bell! The knell of tyranny—the mighty voice,That, to the city and the plain—to earth,And listening heaven, proclaims the glorious tale Of Romere-born, and Freedom. See, the clouds Are swept away, and the moon’s boat of light Sails in the clear blue sky, and million stars Look out on us, and smile. Hark! that great voice Hath broke our bondage. Look, without a stroke The Capitol is won—the gates unfold—The keys are at our feet.Alberti, friend,How shall I pay thy service?Citizens! First to possess the palace citadel—The famous strength of Rome; then to sweep on,Triumphant, through her streets. Oh, glorious wreck Of gods and Caesars! thou shalt reign again,Queen of the world; and I—come on, come on, My people!Live Rienzi—live our Tribune!How goes the trial?Bravely.A good day!Good neighbour, thou’rt a stranger.I have been Away from Rome, good Paolo, since the day Of our deliverance, when Rienzi punished A servant of the Ursini, for striking Thy bonnet from thy head.And now thou find’st This same Rienzi in a way to punish The master.
                     Martin Ursini?The tribune Now sits in judgment on him.Wherefore?Sir, For a breach of the new law—the mighty plunder Of a vast wreck, an argosy—a booty To tempt an emperor.Martin Ursini! Almost our senator! The fearful head Of the fearfullest name of Rome.Ay, he is like— How goes the trial?Well.Is like to swing From a gibbet in the Forum.Will he dare?Dare! why thou saw’st his spirit: now his power Matches his will; and never lineal prince Sate firmer on his throne, or lightlier swayed The reins of empire. He hath swept away The oppressors and extortioners—hath gained Kingly allies—hath reconciled the pope—Hath quelled the barons.Ay, I rode to Rome
                  With a follower of Colonna.Angelo
                  Hath won his father to submission.Hark! The prisoner is condemned.He is. Rienzi
                  Heard him with a grave patience; almost leaning To mercy. But the fact was flagrant.Hark! Another shout. Where go ye?To the Forum, To wait the execution.Ha, the Tribune! And the great prisoner’s kindred.Live Rienzi! Live our just Tribune.Good my lord, beseech ye—Ye plead in vain.Yet hear me.—Force me not To appeal against thy sentence.Ay! To whom? There stand my judges, lords, and yours: the people,The free and honest people! Seek of them If I hold even the scales of justice.Live Our Tribune! our just Tribune.Follow not, But seek Lord Angelo: he hath a power Over this haughty despot.Gods! what tyranny Men will endure in freedom’s name. Yes, yes! Lord Angelo! my foeman though he be, His old hereditary pride will rise Against this churl’s base purpose. If his power—The daughter! Claudia! Quick to seek Colonna;The Tribune holds his court at noon. Quick! Quick!Sweet lady, why so sad?I know not.Try Yon emerald carkanet, or let me braid These pearls in thy long tresses.She affects not Such glittering baubles; rather sing to her One of thy songs from the cold north.Shall Berta
                  Sing to thee, lady.Yes, I care not.Sing.The red rose is queen of the garden bower,That glows in the sun at noon; And the lady lily’s the fairest flower That swings her white bells in the breeze of June; But they who come ’mid frost and flood, Peeping from bank, or root of tree, The primrose and the violet-bud,—They are the dearest flowers to me.The nightingale’s is the sweetest song That ever the rose hath heard; And when the lark sings, the white clouds among,The lily looks up to the heavenly bird:But the robin, with his eye of jet, Who pipes from the bare boughs merrily,To the primrose pale and the violet,—His is the dearest song to me.Didst like the strain?There’s a deep wisdom in it:The lowly blossom, and the wintery friend,—They are the dearest. I’m set i’ the sun To wither.She is sad again. Wouldst hear A merry story, lady? ”Or a tale of murderTo divert thee?”Or a legend Fresh from the Holy Land?The Tribune!Leave us. “Claudia—nay, start not!Thou art sad to-day;I found thee sitting idly, ’midst thy maids—A pretty, laughing, restless band, who plied Quick tongue and nimble finger.” Mute, and pale As marble, those unseeming eyes were fixed On vacant air; and that fair brow was bent As sternly as if the rude stranger, Thought—Age-giving, mirth-destroying, pitiless Thought,Had knocked at thy young giddy brain.Nay, father, Mock not thine own poor Claudia.
                     Claudia used To bear a merry heart, with that clear voice,Prattling; and that light busy foot, astir In her small housewifery, the blithest bee That ever wrought in hive.Oh! mine old home!What ails thee, lady-bird?Mine own dear home! Father, I love not this new state; these halls,Where comfort dies in vastness; these trim maids,Whose service wearies me. Oh! mine old home! My quiet, pleasant chamber, with the myrtle Woven round the casement; and the cedar by,Shading the sun; my garden overgrown With flowers and herbs, thick-set as grass in fields; My pretty snow-white doves; my kindest nurse;And old Camillo.—Oh! mine own dear home!Why, simple child, thou hast thine old fond nurse, And good Camillo, and shalt have thy doves, Thy myrtles, flowers, and cedars; a whole province "Laid in a garden, an’ thou wilt. My Claudia,Hast thou not learnt thy power? Ask orient gems,Diamonds, and sapphires, in rich caskets, wrought By cunning goldsmiths; sigh for rarest birds, Of farthest Ind, like winged flowers, to flit Around thy stately bower; and, at a wish, The precious toys shall wait thee." Old Camillo! Thou shalt have nobler servants,—emperors, kings,Electors, princes! not a bachelor In Christendom but would right proudly kneel, To my fair daughter.Oh! mine own dear home!Wilt have a list to choose from? Listen, sweet! If the tall cedar, and the branchy myrtle, And the white doves, were tell-tales, I would ask them Whose was the shadow on the sunny wall? And if, at eventide, they heard not oft A tuneful mandoline, and then a voice, Clear in its manly depth, whose tide of song O’erwhelmed the quivering instrument; and then A world of whispers, mixed with low response, Sweet, short, and broken, as divided strains Of nightingales.Oh, father! father!Well! Do’st love him,Claudia?Father!Do’st thou love Young Angelo? Yes? Saidst thou yes? That heart—That throbbing heart of thine, keeps such a coil, I cannot hear thy words. He is returned To Rome; he left thee on mine errand, dear one;And now—Is there no casement-myrtle wreathed, No cedar in our courts, to shade to-nightThe lover’s song?Oh, father! father!Now,Back to thy maidens, with a lightened heart,Mine own beloved child. Thou shalt be first In Rome, as thou art fairest; never princessBrought to the proud Colonna such a dower As thou. Young Angelo hath chosen his mate From out an eagle’s nest.Alas! alas! I tremble at the height. Whene’er I think Of the hot barons, of the fickle people, And the inconstancy of power, I tremble For thee, dear father.Tremble! Let them tremble. I am their master,Claudia, whom they scorned, Endured, protected.—Sweet, go dream of love .. I am their master,Claudia.Gibbet and cord! a base plebeian death! And he the head of the great Roman name, That rivalled the Colonna! Ursini,Thy brother shall not die. The grief is thine,The shame is general. How say ye, barons?If ye resist, ye share his doom. Plead! plead! Dissemble with the tyrant,—stifle hate, And master scorn, as I have done. Plead for him.To Cola! Can I frame my speech to sue To Cola—most familiar of the drones That thronged my hall of afternoons, content To sit below the salt, and bear all jests,—The retinue and pest of greatness. Sue To Cola!Fear not, but revenge will come, We being friends, from whose dissension sprang The usurper’s strength. An hour will come. Lord Angelo, Thou wilt not fail us.Surely, no! ’tis stern, Revengeful, cruel, pitiless! The people—To soothe the fickle people—yet he’s wiser: He’ll be persuaded.He approaches.What! Ushered with music as a king.Why, this Is well, my lords, this full assemblage. Now The chief of Rome stands fitly girt with names Strong as their towers around him. Fall not off, And we shall be impregnable. Lord Nuncio, I should have askedthy blessing. I have sent Our missions to the pontiff. Count Savelli,—My lord ambassador, I crave your pardon.What news from Venice, the sea-queen?Savelli, I have a little maiden who must know Thy fairest daughter. Angelo,Colonna,A double welcome! Rome lacked half her state Wanting her princely Columns.Sir, I come A suitor to thee.—Martin Ursini—When last his name was on thy lips.—Well, sir, Thy suit, thy suit! If pardon, take at once My answer.—No.Yet, mercy—
                     Angelo,Waste not thy pleadings on a desperate cause And a resolved spirit. She awaits thee. Haste to that fairer court.My Lord Colonna, This is a needful justice.Noble Tribune, It is a crime which custom—Ay, the law Of the strong against the weak—your law, the law Of the sword and spear. But, gentles, ye live now Under the good estate.He is noble.Therefore, A thousand times he dies. Ye are noble, sirs, And need a warning.Sick, almost to death.Ye have less cause to grieve.New-wedded.Ay,Madonna Laura is a blooming dame,And will become her weeds.Remember, Tribune,He hath two uncles, cardinals. Wouldst outrage The sacred college?The lord cardinals, Meek, pious, lowly men, and loving virtue, Will render thanks to him who wipes a blot So flagrant from their name.An Ursini! Head of the Ursini!Mine only brother!And darest talk thou to me of brothers? Thou,Whose groom—wouldst have me break my own just laws,To save thy brother? thine! Hast thou forgotten When that most beautiful and blameless boy, The prettiest piece of innocence that ever Breath’d in this sinful world, lay at thy feet, Slain by thy pampered minion, and I knelt Before thee for redress, whilst thou—didst never Hear talk of retribution? This is justice,Pure justice, not revenge!—Mark well, my lords,—Pure equal justice. Martin Ursini
                  Had open trial, is guilty, is condemned, And he shall die!Yet listen to us—Lords, If ye could range before me all the peers,Prelates, and potentates of Christendom,—The holy pontiff kneeling at my knee, And emperors crouching at my feet, to sue For this great robber, still I should be blind As justice. But this very day a wife, One infant hanging at her breast, and two,Scarce bigger, first-born twins of misery, Clinging to the poor rags that scarcely hid Her squalid form, grasped at my bridle-reinTo beg her husband’s life; condemned to die For some vile petty theft, some paltry scudi:And, whilst the fiery war-horse chaf’d and reared, Shaking his crest, and plunging to get free, There, midst the dangerous coil, unmov’d, she stood,Pleading in broken words, and piercing shrieks,And hoarse low shivering sobs, the very cry Of nature! And, when I at last said no— For I said no to her—she flung herself And those poor innocent babes between the stones And my hot Arab’s hoofs. We sav’d them all,—Thank heaven, we saved them all! but I said noTo that sad woman, midst her shrieks. Ye dare not Ask me for mercy now.Yet he is noble! Let him not die a felon’s death:Again,Ye weary me. No more of this. Colonna,Thy son loves my fair daughter. ’Tis an union, However my young Claudia might have graced A monarch’s side, that augurs hopefully—Bliss to the wedded pair, and peace to Rome, "And it shall be accomplished. Good my lords, I bid ye to the bridal; one and all, I bid ye to the bridal feast. And now A fair good morrow!Hath stern destiny Clothed him in this man’s shape, that, in a breath,He deals out death and marriage? Ursini! 
                     Colonna! be ye stunned?I’ll follow him! Tyrant! usurper! base-born churl! to deem That son of mine—Submit, as I have done,For vengeance. From our grief and shame shall spring A second retribution; and this banquet,—This nuptial banquet, this triumphal hour,Shall be the very scene of our revenge!I may not loiter here. The fatal moment Of our disgrace is nigh.—Ere evening close,I’ll seek thee at thy palace. Seem to yield,And victory is sure.I’ll take thy counsel.He bears him like a prince, save that he lacks The port serene of majesty. His mood Is fitful; stately now, and sad; anon,Full of a hurried mirth; courteous awhile,And mild; then bursting, on a sudden, forth,Into sharp biting taunts.And at the altar,When he first found the proud and angry mother Refused to grace the nuptials, even the nuncio
                  Quailed at his fiery threats.I saw Colonna
                  Gnawing his lip for wrath.Why, this new power Mounts to the brain like wine. For such disease,Your skilful leech lets blood.Suspects he aught Of our design? we hunt a subtle quarry.But with a wilier huntsman. 
                     Ursini,Hath every point been guarded? be the masquers Valiant and strongly armed? have ye ta’en order To close the gates—to seize his train—to cut The cordage of the bell, that none may summon The people to his rescue?All is cared for, And vengeance certain. Before set of sun,We shall be masters of ourselves, of Rome,And Rome’s proud ruler. This quaint masque of ours—What is the watchword?Death.Peace, peace—he comes!No, ’tis the blooming bride. Young Angelo
                  Hath no ill choice in beauty.’Tis a maid Shy as a ring-dove. See, how delicate, How gentle, yet how coy! Poor pretty fooNo harm must happen her.None, none.Good kinsman,I would not have thee hear Savelli speak Of thy fair bride.Ah! doth he praise her? Lords, Beseech ye sit. Lords and Ladies sit down.
                     Savelli, I would fainMake of thy daughter and my blushing wife A pair of lovely friends. Look where they stand,The fairest two in Rome.The Tribune comes.Where lags our hostess? Take thy state, fair bride—"Thy one day’s queenship. See, the nuptial wreath Sits crown-like on thy brow; thy nuptial robeFlows royally. Come, come, be gracious! Bid A smiling welcome to the subject world. Nay, never blush nor hang thy head;" remember Thou art a Colonna. Wouldst thou be the first Of that proud name to ape the peasant’s virtue,Humility? Fie! fie!Sir, the Colonna—Nay, good my father, sure to-day our name Hath cause of pride.Heaven grant it prove so!Lady,Thou art silent still.Shall I speak for thee, love? Oh, weak and ineffectual were my words,Matched with thy burning blush, thy quivering smile,Thy conscious silence,Claudia!—Gentle friends,Ye are nobly welcome.This is well, fair son! Yet we lack mirth. Have ye no masque astir?No dance, no music, no quaint mystery, To drive away the spectre, thought? A bridal Is but a gilt and painted funeral To the fond father who hath yielded up His one sweet child. Claudia, thy love, thy duty,Thy very name, is gone. Thou art another’s;Thou hast a master now; and I have thrown My precious pearl away. Yet men who give A living daughter to the fickle will Of a capricious bridegroom, laugh—the madmen!Laugh at the jocund bridal feast, and weep When the fair corse is laid in blessed rest,Deep, deep in mother earth. Oh, happier far,So to have lost my child!Father!Thou hast gained A son, not lost a daughter.Love her, Angelo; Be kind to her as I have been; defend her,Cherish her, love her.More than life.Bring mirth—Music, and dance, and song, and I will laugh, And chase away these images of death That float afore mine eyes. A song—a song!Thou shouldst have named the masque.Better anon.Hail to the gentle bride! the doveHigh nested in the column’s crest!Oh, welcome as the bird of loveWho bore the olive-sign of rest! Hail to the bride!Hail to the gentle bride! the flowerWhose garlands round the column twine!Oh, fairer than the citron bower! More fragrant than the blossom’d vine! Hail to the bride!Hail to the gentle bride! the star Whose radiance o’er the column beams! Oh, soft as moonlight, seen afar,A silver shine on trembling streams! Hail to the bride!A pleasant strain! What wouldst thou, friend?May it please thee To read this scroll, great Tribune.Can the daemonTo whom his soul is pledged have ta’en this way To show our secret?—No, he smiles! he smiles! His hand shakes not!—I breathe again.Fair sir,All thou hast asked is granted. ’Tis no day To frown on a petition. Mirth, my lords,—Bring Mirth! I brook no pause of revelry. Have ye no masque?He rushes in the toils; Now weave the meshes round him.Sooth, my lord, We had plotted to surprise the gentle bride With a slight dance,—a toy, an antic.Ay,And when?Soon as the bell tolled four, the masquers were bid to enter.Four? And how attired?Turban’d and rob’d, and with swart visagesA troop of lusty Moors.
                     Camillo, hark!—Admit these revellers;Mark me.—Now, vengeance, thou art mine!Wine—wine! Fill me a goblet high with sparkling wine!Fill high, my noble guests.Claudia Rienzi, And Angelo Colonna! Bless’d be they And we in their fair union! Doubly curs’dWho’er in wish or thought would loose that tie The bond of peace to Rome! Drink, good my lords,Fill high the mantling wine, and in the bowl Be all unkindness buried!Heartily We pledge you, noble Tribune.Why, Colonna! Brother!—
                        Colonna rises. He startles at the word. He eyesThe cup as it were poisoned. Dost thou think We’ve drugged the draught? I’ll be thy taster.—Drink! The wine is honest—we’re no traitors!Drink!I pr’ythee, drink!Health to the gentle bride! Health to my children!This is fatherly;Noble Colonna, this is princely. Now,If any scorn thee, Claudia, say Colonna, Whose word is truth, hailed thee his child.My lords And kinsmen all, if a poor simple maid, And yet Rienzi’s daughter, so may dare To call ye, take my thanks. On every head Be every fair wish trebled. Gentle friends—Wilt thou not wait the masque? Thou wilt not.—Well! We must carouse the deeper. "Hark,Francesco! Go bid the fountains, from their marble mouths,Pour the rich juice of the Sicilian grape, A flood of molten rubies, that our kind And drouthy fellow-citizens may chorusHail to the gentle bride. I would fain bid Old Tyber flow with wine." Another cup—To thee and thine,Colonna! fill the bowl,Higher and higher! Let the phantom, fear,—And doubt, that haunts sound princes,—and suspicion, That broods a harpy o’er the banquet,—flee Down to the uttermost depths of hell. A health To thee and thine,Colonna!Of what doubt Speaks our great Tribune?A fit tale of mirth,To crown the goblet!Doubt!—Spake I of doubt? Fear!—Said I fear?—So fenced around by friends, Allies, and kinsmen, what have I to fear From treason or from traitors?—Say yon band Were rebels, ye would guard me!—Call them murderers, Ye would avenge me.Ay, by death.And thou?By death!Seize the foul traitors. Ye have passed Your own just sentence. Yield, my masters, yield!Your men are overpowered; your masquers chained; The courts are lined with guards, and at one stroke—One touch upon this bell, the strength of Rome, All that hath life within the walls, will rise To crush ye. Yield your swords. Do ye not shame To wear them?—Yield your swords.
                     Rienzi! Villain!An thou but touch the Lord Colonna—ay,An thou but dare to lay thy ruffian hand Upon his garment—Seize his sword.Again! Art frenetic,Rienzi?Seek of them.Father, in mercy, speak! Give me a cause;And, though a legion hemmed thee in, thy son Should rescue thee. Speak but one word, dear father, Only one word! Sure as I live, thou art guiltless; Sure as the sun tracks his bright path in heaven, Thy course is pure.—Yet speak!He is silent.Speak.Doth not that silence answer thee? Look on them.Thou know’st them, Angelo:—the bold Savelli, The Frangipani, and the Ursini,— Ay, and the high Colonna; well thou knowest Each proud and lofty visage;—mark them, now:They should be signed as Cain of old, for Guilt—Detected, baffled, murderous Guilt, hath set His bloody hand upon them. Son, thou shudderest!Their tawny masquers should have slain me; here,Before my daughter’s eyes; here, at thy bridal; Here in my festive hour—the mutual cup Sparkling; the mutual pledge half spoke; the bread, Which we have broke together, unconsumed Upon the board; joyful, and full of wine; Sinful and unconfessed;—so had I fallen;And so—the word was death.—From their own lips Came their own righteous sentence—Death!Oh, mercy! Mercy!—Thou liv’st.—’Twas but the intent—My death Were nothing; but, through me, the traitors struck At peace, at liberty, at Rome—my country,Bright and regenerate, the world’s mistress once, And doomed, like the old fabled bird, to rise Strong from her ashes. Did ye think the people
                  Could spare their Tribune? Did ye deem them weary Of equal justice; and mild law; and freedom As liberal as the air; and mighty fame, A more resplendant sun? Sirs, I am guarded By the invisible shield of love, which blunts The darts of treachery. I cannot die, Whilst Rome commands me, live. For ye, foul traitors, I pardon ye, and I despise ye.—Go! Ye are free.Oh, thanks, my father.Said he thanks? Chains, bring me chains! such words from such a tongue Were slavery worse than death.—Chains—Chains—Ye are free.Is the proud pillar of Colonna fallen,That base plebeian feet bestride its shaft? Is Ursini’s strong bear muzzled and chained,That every cur—Good cousin, pr’ythee peace;The Tribune means us fairly.Still ye are free.—Yet mark me, signors:—Tame your rebel bloods;Be faithful subjects to the good estate; Demolish your strong towers, which overtop Our beautiful city with barbarian pride, Loosing fell rapine, discord, and revenge, From out their dens accurs’d. Be quiet subjects, And ye shall find the state a gentle mistress—Else—Doth he threaten?Hush! this is no time,—An hour will come—What, do you mutter, traitors? Follow me instant to the Lateran. There, at the holy altar, with such rites,As to profane were sin more damnable Than treason ever dared, to offer up Your vowed allegiance to free’dRome,—to me,Her servant, minister, deliverer,—me,Your master. Ye are free; but I will chain Your rebel souls with oaths. Follow me, sirs.Nay, Ursini, why pluck me by the sleeve? Why steal from the procession?—Why reawaken The tyrant’s anger?For revenge!—Ye are stunned, Bewildered, as men rousing from a dream,That know not where they stand. Dost thou not see Our great revenge is sure? The tyrant walks Blinded by his vain glory; confident In that straw fetter, an extorted oath; And we—Why are we not resolved? And be not Our bold retainers waiting armed in proof, Without the gates of Rome?—What, if to-night—This very hour. Our tried and hardy band, Led by the chivalry of Rome, could carry The city at a charge; andRome herself Will rise against the madman.Here comes one, Whose name were worth a host. Didst thou not mark,How, stung by the sharp scorn Rienzi flung On proud Colonna, the young bridegroom broke From his new father’s side?Lord Angelo, A truant from this pageant?As thou see’st.Yet, thy good father, our great Tribune—Sir, I am a son of the Colonna.Ay,The heir of that most princely house; and, sir, Fair though she be, a friend must frankly wish She owned another sire.No more!—no more!How pass’d the ceremonial, Count? Beseech thee,Tell us of these new rites.The noble train Rolled smoothly on. Rienzi led the band Right royally, sceptered and robed, and backing A milk-white Arab, from whose eyeballs flashed Quick gleams of glittering light. Colonna held The bridle-rein.Stephen Colonna!Ay—Thy father, sir. We meaner barons walked Behind, bareheaded, and with folded arms, As men doing penance to the holy shrine Of St. John Lateran. Then came a mummery Of oaths to that indefinite she, the State— Republic, sir, is out of date—and then—Ay, tell that impious outrage.Then Rienzi, Stepping before the altar, his bold hand Laid on the consecrated Host, sent forth, In a full pealing voice, that rolled along The fretted roof, like the loud organ-swell, A rash and insolent summons to the Pope And Cardinals; next he cited to appear The imperial rivals,Charles and Lewis; next, The Electors Palatine. Then, whilst the aisles Of the hushed church prolonged his words, he drew His dazzling sword, and, waving the bright blade To the four points of Heaven, cried with a deep Intensity of will, that drove his words Like arrows through the brain,—"This, too, is mine.”Yes, to each part of this fair earth he cried,—"Thou, too, art mine.”Madman! And ye—We listened In patience and in silence; whilst he stood His form dilating, and his haughty glance Instinct with fiery pride.Now, by St. John, Had I been there, ye should have heard a voice Answer this frenzied summoner.Our answer Is yet unspoken. Angelo Colonna, If the old glories of thy princely race, Thy knightly honour, thy fresh-budding fame,Outshine the red and white of Claudia’s cheek, Then—Wherefore pause? I know thee, Ursini,—
                     Rienzi’s mortal foe, and scarce a friend To the Colonna;—yet, in honour’s name—Say on!Lead home the steed. I’ll walk from hence.Meet me at the Colonna Palace. Fail not.Ah! he is here.—Son! Ye may leave us, lords,—We are content with your good serviceSon, Methinks this high solemnity might well Have claimed thy presence. A great ruler’s heir Should be familiar in the people’s eyes; Live on their tongues; take root within their hearts;Win woman’s smiles by honest courtesy, And force man’s tardier praise by bold desert: So, when the chief shall die, the general loveMay hail his successor. But thou, where wast thou? If with thy bride—I have not seen her.—Tribune,— Thou wav’st away the word with such a scorn As I poured poison in thine ear.—Already Dost weary of the title?Wherefore should I?Thou art ambitious.Granted.And wouldst be A king.There thou mistak’st.—A king! fair son!Power dwelleth not in sound, and fame hath garlands Brighter than diadems. I might have been Anointed, sceptered, crowned, have cast a blaze Of glory round the old imperial wreath,The laurel of the Caesars; but I chose To master kings, not to be one; "to direct The royal puppets as my sovereign will,And Rome—my Rome, decree.—Tribune! the Gracchi
                  Were called so.”--Tribune! I will make that name A word of fear to kings.
                     Rienzi! Tribune! Hast thou forgotten, on this very spot,How thou didst shake the slumbering soul of Rome
                  With the brave sound of freedom, till she rose, And from her giant limbs the shackles dropped,Burst by one mighty throe? Hadst thou died then,History had crowned thee with a glorious title—Deliverer of thy country.Well!Alas!When now thou fall’st, as fall thou must, ’twill be The common tale of low ambition.—Tyrants O’erthrown to form a wilder tyranny; 
                     Princes cast down, that thy obscurer house May rise on nobler ruins.Hast thou ended? I fain would have mistaken thee—hast done?No; for, despite thy smothered wrath, the voice Of warning truth shall reach thee. Thou to-dayHast, by thy frantic sacrilege, drawn on thee The thunders of the church, the mortal feud Of either emperor. Here, at home, the barons
                  Hate, and the people shun thee. Seest thou not,Even in this noon of pride, thy waning power Fade, flicker, and wax dim. Thou art as one Perched on some lofty steeple’s dizzy height, Dazzled by the sun, inebriate by long draughts Of thinner air; too giddy to look down Where all his safety lies; too proud to dare The long descent to the low depths from whence The desperate climber rose.Ay, there’s the sting,—That I, an insect of to-day, outsoar The reverend worm, nobility!Wouldst shame me With my poor parentage!—Sir, I’m the son Of him who kept a sordid hostelry In the Jews’ quarter; my good mother cleansed Linen for honest hire.—Canst thou say worse?Can worse be said?Add, that my boasted schoolcraft Was gained from such base toil, gained with such pain That the nice nurture of the mind was oft,Stolen at the body’s cost. I have gone dinnerless And supperless, the scoff of our poor street,For tattered vestments and lean hungry looks, To pay the pedagogue.—Add what thou wilt Of injury. Say that, grown into man,I’ve known the pittance of the hospital, And, more degrading still, the patronage Of the Colonna. Of the tallest trees The roots delve deepest. Yes, I’ve trod thy halls, Scorned and derided midst their ribald crew, A licensed jester, save the cap and bells:I have borne this—and I have borne the death, The unavenged death, of a dear brother. I seemed I was a base ignoble slave. What am I?—Peace, I say!—what am I now? Head of this great republic, chief of Rome; In all but name, her sovereign; last of all,Thy father.In an evil hour—Dar’st thou Say that? An evil hour for thee, my Claudia! Thou shouldst have been an emperor’s bride, my fairest. In evil hour thy woman’s heart was caught,“By the form moulded as an antique god;”The gallant bearing, the feigned tale of love—All false, all outward, simulated all.But that I loved her, but that I do love her,With a deep tenderness, softer and fonder Than thy ambition-hardened heart e’er dream’d of, My sword should answer thee.Go to, Lord Angelo;Thou lov’st her not.—Men taunt not, nor defy The dear one’s kindred. A bright atmosphere Of sunlight and of beauty breathes around The bosom’s idol.—I have lov’d—she loves thee; And therefore thy proud father,—even the shrew, Thy railing mother, in her eyes, are sacred. Lay not thy hand upon thy sword, fair son—Keep that brave for thy comrades. I’ll not fight thee. Go and give thanks to yonder simple bride,That her plebeian father mews not up,Safe in the citadel, her noble husband. Thou art dangerous,Colonna. But, for her,Beware!Come back,Rienzi! Thus I throw A brave defiance in thy teeth.Once more,Beware!Take up the glove!This time, for her—For her dear sake—come to thy bride! home! home!Dost fear me, tribune of the people!Fear! Do I fear thee!—Tempt me no more.—This once,Home to thy bride!Now, Ursini, I come—Fit partner of thy vengeance!Five thousand horsemen at the gates of Rome, And armed retainers in each house, and knights Harness’d in glittering mail; with banner proud,And trump, and war-cry, hurling their bright spears At the ursurper’s head! Why, now I know ye,My gallant kinsmen.—When ye crouched, like hounds,Beneath the tyrant’s lash; or stealthily,At midnight meetings, and below your breath,Mutter’d of murders—the quick poinard-stroke—The calculated poison, that consumes So much of life a day—or that mute slayer, The Eastern bow-string,—chivalry of Rome, What marvel that I knew ye not, distained With such base purpose. Now ye have clothed death In the brave guise of war, and made him gay And lovely as a bridegroom, speed ye forth! Away! the sun is low!—Ye have a city To win, ere night!Better await the night;And then, in darkness and in storm, at once Crush the stunn’d Tribune.Dost thou say await,Stephen Colonna? Dost thou seek the veil Of darkness for a deed of light?—On, on! Whilst yet the sunbeams kiss the glittering stream Of armed knights and barbed steeds.—On, on! Whilst yet the column’d banners of our house May catch their parting glory, as the peaks Of highest Alps shine o’er the twilight world.The lady counsels well. In every street Stand knots of citizens in sad debate Of their proud ruler’s frenzy; I have sent Bold tongues amongst them, madam—Lo! thy son!Sir, since he called Rienzi’s daughter wife, I have no son!Oh, mother, say not so! 
                     Savelli!Ursini! ye bade me hither With broken phrase and solemn tone, and pause Of mighty import. Good my lords, I come To read your mystery. The city’s full Of camp-like noises; tramp of steeds, and clash Of mail, and trumpet-blast, and ringing clang Of busy armourers; the grim ban-dog bays; The champing war-horse in his stall neighs loud; The vulture shrieks aloft. Ye are still leagued Against Rienzi.Wouldst betray—Betray! Why, I am spurned, derided, scorned, cast off,As a child’s broken toy. Betray! I come To join ye. Ay, dear mother, to pull down The haughty tyrant from his throne, or fall As may beseem thy son. Angels and saints,Bear witness to my oath!I do believe thee With a most constant faith. On thy clear brow Honour and victory sit crowned.Oh, put me To the proof, my lords! Why stay we here? Good father,Think’st thou suspicion’s straining eye-balls sleep,Or that the watcher, doubt, hath lost her keen And delicate sense of sound? We must forerun The tyrant’s fear. Follow me, ye that love The joy of glorious battle!
                     Angelo!Nay, when the fight is won.—Then thou shalt dew My laurels with glad tears.—Stay me not now.Bear to the fight thy mother’s blessing, boy—Her proud and joyful blessing, not her tears. Thou art the last of all my children,Angelo—Dearest and last. Unkindness never came Betwixt us twain save once. But, had I sons As many and as brave as that old queen Who mourned her Troy in ashes, I would peril Each several warrior in this cause as freely As thou, my one fair boy. Now speed thee forth,To conquest or to death.—Why lingerest thou,My Angelo?Mother!What wouldst thou?
                     Claudia!His daughter.Poor, poor Claudia! I have left her Even on our bridal-day. But, if I fall—Mother!Fie! Fie! his daughter! speed thee forth To battle!—On, brave kinsmen!Father! At last I find thee, father!Well, my child!What wouldst thou?Nay, I know not. Be the guests Departed?Yes.All gone; and wherefore went yeTo the Lateran, dear father? And where loiters—Aspic!Methought a bridal should be merrier—Not merrier, but happier. Angelo!Oh, foulest ingrate! when I wed thy mother— Oh, fiend accurs’d!Nay, nay,—perchance he’s gone To crave his mother’s blessing. Is’t not strange That I should love so well who loves not me? But I have felt a yearning of the heart Toward that majestic lady, which hath reached Almost to painfulness. If I should kneel Before her and implore her grace—Thou’dst find Such welcome as the mountain cat might yield To the dappled fawn; such greeting as the wolf To the curled lamb.Oh! she would love me, father,Even for the prideful love of Angelo,That woke her hatred first. A mother joys To tell fond legends of her children: who,Like me, would listen, with unwearied ear,To tales of Angelo, and call for moreAnd, when her store was ended, cry again;And every day, and all day long, be fed With praise of that dear name? Why dost thou groan?A scorpion stung me.Kill it, father—kill it, Before it sting again.Alas, alas! I’ll think of him no more. 
                     Camillo, speak! Thy breathless speed and pallid cheeks have told A world of news already. Quick, Alberti! Thy tidings, man,—thy tidings!Good my lord, 
                     Rome is begirt with foes. The barons lead Their vassals,—every palace voids a horde Of armed retainers.By Our Lady’s name, I have not heard so glad a sound, since that Which hailed me Tribune of the people! What!These masking murderers turned to warrior knights?Their mine of treason sprung! Now we shall work In daylight. Toll the bell—summon the guards!— Sweet, to thy chamber!
                     Angelo!He leads The rebel force.’Tis false!I would it were.Thou liest,—he is no rebel. Whom he leads,Are friends to aid the Tribune. Be they not,
                     Camillo? Speak, old man,—Be they not friends?Alas! sweet lady.Go not forth, dear father,—They lie—be sure they lie,—yet go not forth! Stay here with me! Avoid him!—stay with me!Leave me not here alone!Peace, peace!I’ll meet him. Armed or unarmed, as friend or foe, I’ll fly To meet Lord Angelo. I am his wife—His own true wife.Entice her to her chamber, And watch that she escapes not. Now, good captain, Let the great bell, with loud and hasty tongue,Summon the people, and the trumpet-soundCollect the scattered guard. Be they all faithful?I’ll answer for them with my life.What, ho! My armour! See that Saladin be barbed Complete in mail. By heaven, there is a joy In fronting these proud nobles,—they who deem Man valiant by descent.Shall we not send To guard the city gates?To fling them wide! Let the weak timid hare and wily fox Fence their dank earthy holes,—the lion’s den Is open. We will fight for Rome and freedom,Here in Rome’s very streets, beside the hearths Of the freed citizens, the household godsWorshipped in every faith. Fling wide the gates!I’ll follow on the instant. Ho, my armour!My Lord Rienzi.See, he waves thee off: Trouble him not,Alberti—he is chafed, Moody, and fierce, as though this victory,Which drove the noble mutineers before ye,As stag-hounds chase a herd of deer, had ended In blank defeat.The Tribune bore him bravelyAnd we are victors.—Yet the storm is hush’d,Not spent. When, after this wild night of war,The sun arose, he showed a troubled scene Of death and disarray; a doubtful flight, A wavering triumph. Even at the gate 
                     Savelli re-collects his scattered band; The people falter; and the soldiery Mutter low curses as they fight, and yearn For their old leaders. Victors though we be, The Tribune totters. His hot pride—yet, sooth,He bore him gallantly. Beneath his sword Fell the dark plotter,Ursini.How faredThe bold Colonna?The old valiant chief, With many a younger pillar of that high And honoured house, lies dead.And Angelo?A prisoner. As he knelt beside the corse Of his brave father, without word or blow, As easily as an o’er-wearied child, We seized him.Lo! the Tribune!Now admit Your prisoners; we would see them. Thou,Camillo, Summon the headsman, and prepare the court For sudden execution.If a true And faithful servant of the good estate,—If thine old friend, great Tribune—Hark ye, sir! The difficult duty of supreme command Rests on my head. Obedience is thy light And easy task,—obedience swift and blind, “As yonder sword, death’s sharp-edged instrument,My faithful servant, an’ thou wilt, my friend, Owes to this strong right hand.Look that the headsmanBe ready presently.” The prisoners! Ay, Even this poor simple remnant of the wars Can lead their fickle purpose. Abject changelings! Base huggers of their chains! Methought, to-dayThese Roman Helots would have crouch’d i’ the dust At sound of their old master’s whips. I have been Too easy with the slaves. Terror, not love,Strikes anchor in ignoble souls. These prisonersWhy could they not have died, as die thy shall.Was there no lance, no soldier’s glorious way To let out life, but they must wait the slow And shameful axe? Yet Angelo—My lord, The prisoners!Bring them to the light. The prisoners! The noble prisoners! I have seen ye, sirs, Before, at Claudia’s bridal,—you, and you, The Frangipani, and the Ursini,—Ay, and the high Colonna: my allies, My friends, my subjects; ye who swore to me Allegiance at the altar; ye for whom One harlot sin is not enough,—who pile, Adulterate in crime, treason on murder, And perjury on treason! Hence! begone! Ye know your doom.And fear it not.To death! To instant death. Hold! here is one. Lord Angelo, How shall I call thee, son or traitor?Foe. I know no father, save the valiant deadWho lives behind a rampart of his slain In warlike rest. I bend before no king,Save the dread Majesty of heaven. Thy foe, Thy mortal foe, Rienzi.Well!my foe. Thou hast seen me fling a pardon free as air, To foemen crouching at my feet; hast seen The treachery that paid me. I have lost My faith in man’s bold eye—"his earnest voice,The keen grasp of his hand, the speech where truthSeems gushing in each ardent word." I have known So many false, that, as a mariner Escaped from shipwreck, in the summer sea, Sparkling with gentle life, sees but the rocks On which his vessel struck, so I, in the bright And most majestic face of man, can read Nought but a smiling treason. Yet thou, Angelo, Thou art not all a lie! If I should trust—Sir, I shall not deceive thee. Mark,Rienzi! If thou release me—’tis the thought that works Even now within thy brain—before yon sun Reach the hot west, the war-cry of Colonna
                  Shall sweep once more thy streets. Then, stern revenge, Or smiling death!Madman!Wouldst have me live,—Thou who hast levelled to the earth the pride Of my old princely race? My kinsmen lie Scattered and fallen in the highway; and he,The stateliest pillar of our house, my father, Stephen Colonna—oh! the very name, The bright ancestral name, which as a star Pointed to glory, fell into eclipse When my brave father died!I spared him once; Spared for a second treason. And again—Sir, he is dead. If thou wouldst show me grace,Lay me beside him in the grave.And Claudia—Thy virgin bride!Alas! alas, for thee, Sweet wife! Yet thou art pure as the white clouds That sail around the moon; thy home is heaven,—There we shall meet again; here we are parted For ever.Wherefore?She is thy daughter.Boy! Proud abject minion of a name, a sound,Think’st thou to beard me thus! thou hast thy will. Away with them! Dost hear me, dallying slave? Off with the prisoners.All, my lord?With all.For this I thank thee. Bear one fond farewell To Claudia. Tell her, that my latest prayer Shall blend her name with mine. For thee,Rienzi, Tremble! a tyrant’s rule is brief.They are gone,And my heart’s lightened; how the traitor stood Looking me down with his proud eye, disdaining Fair mercy,—making of the hideous block An altar,—of unnatural ghastly death,A god. He hath his will; and I—my heart Is tranquil.Father! father!Guard the door! Be sure ye give not way.Father!To seeHer looks! her tears!Who dares to stop me? Father!I bade ye guard the entrance.Against me! Ye must have men and gates of steel, to bar 
                     Claudia from her dear father. Where is he? They said that he was with you—he—thou know’st Whom I would say. I heard ye loud. I thought I heard ye; but, perchance, the dizzying throb Of my poor temples—Where is he? I see No corse—an’ he were dead—Oh, no, no, no!Thou couldst not, wouldst not! Say he lives.As yet He lives.Oh! blessings on thy heart, dear father! Blessings on thy kind heart! When shall I see him? Is he in prison? Fear hath made me weak,And wordless as a child. Oh! send for him.—Thou hast pardoned him;—didst thou not say but now Thou hadst pardoned him..No.Oh, thou hast! thou hast! This is the dalliance thou wast wont to hold When I have craved some girlish boon,—a bird, A flower, a moonlight walk; but now I ask thee Life, more than life. Thou hast pardoned him?My Claudia!Ay! I am thine own Claudia, whose first word Was father! These are the same hands that clung Around thy knees, a tottering babe; the lips That, ere they had learnt speech, would smile, and seek To meet thee with an infant’s kiss; the eyesThou hast called so like my mother’s; eyes, that never Gazed on thee, but with looks of love.—Oh, pardon! Nay, father, speak not yet: thy brows are knit Into a sternness. Pry’thee, speak not yet!This traitor—Call him as thou wilt, but pardon! Oh, pardon!He defies me.See, I kneel, And he shall kneel, shall kiss thy feet; wilt pardon?Mine own dear Claudia.Pardon!Raise thee up; Rest on my bosom; let thy beating heart Lie upon mine; so shall the mutual pang Be stilled. Oh! that thy father’s soul could bear This grief for thee, my sweet one! Oh, forgive—Forgive thee what? ’Tis so the headsman speaks To his poor victim, ere he strikes. Do fathers Make widows of their children?—send them down To the cold grave heart-broken? Tell me not Of fathers,—I have none! All else that breathes Hath known that natural love: the wolf is kind To her vile cubs; the little wren hath care For each small youngling of her brood; and thou— The word that widowed, orphaned me? Henceforth My home shall be his grave.— and yet thou canst not— Father!Ay!Dost call me father once again, my Claudia,—Mine own sweet child!Oh, father, pardon him! Oh, pardon! pardon!—’Tis my life I ask In his. Our lives, dear fatherHo,Camillo! Where loiters he! 
                     Camillo, take my ring;Fly to the captain of the guard, Alberti; Bid him release Lord Angelo.Now bless thee,—Bless thee, my father!Fly, Camillo, fly! Why loiterest thou?The ring.Give me the ring. Whose speed may match with mine? Let me be first To speak those gracious words of pardon.No!That were no place for thee.I should see nought But him! whilst old Camillo—Oh, I hear His weary footfall still!—I should have been In Angelo’s arms ere now.Bell sounds. Hark! hark! the bell!It is the bell that thou so oft hast heard Summoning the band of liberty—"the bell That pealed its loud triumphant note, and raisedIts mighty voice with such a masteryOf glorious power, as if the spirit of soundThat dwells in the viewless wind, and walks the wavesOf the chafed sea, and rules the thunder-cloudThat shrouded him in that small orb, to spread Tidings of freedom to the nations." Now It tells of present peril.Say, of death. Oh father! every stroke thrills through my veins,Swaying the inmost pulses of my heart As swings the deep vibration. ’Tis his knell.My child,Have I not said that he shall live?Then stop That bell. The dismal noise beats on me, father, As from a thousand echoes; mixed with groans, And shrieks, and moanings in the air. Dost hear them? Dost hear, again? Be those screams real, father? Or of the gibbering concerts that salute The newly mad?Be calmer, sweet. I heard A shriek—a woman’s shriek. Calm thee, my child.He’s dead. He’s dead!It is her husband, Claudia; Stephen Colonna.Murderer, ’tis my son, My husband died in honour’d fight; for him I weep not.
                     Angelo is pardoned,Claudia.He is dead. I saw the axe, fearfully bright, Wave o’er his neck with an edgy shine that cut My burning eye-balls; saw the butcher-stroke And the hot blood gush like a fountain high, From out the veins; and then I heard a voice Cry pardon! heard a shout that chorused pardon! Pardon! to that disjoined corse! Oh, deep And horrible mockery! So the fiends shall chant Round thy tormented soul, and pardon, pardon, Ring through the depths of hell. "Claudia, my sweet one, Look up—speak to me! Writhe not thus, my Claudia, Shivering about my feet.""Claudia Colonna! They say that grief is proud; but I will own thee. Now, my fair daughter, rouse thee!—Help me curse Him who hath slain thy husband."Woman,  fiend,Thou kill’st my child,—avaunt!"When I have said Mine errand. Think’st thou I came here to crush Yon feeble worm?—Thou hast done that! She loved him,Fair faithful wretch, and thou—Why, I could laugh At such a vengeance! Thy keen axe, that hewed My column to the earth, struck down the weed That crept around its base.""Claudia! she moves!She is not dead.""Dead! Why, the dead are bless’d, And she is blasted.—Dead! the dead lie down In peace, and she shall pine a living ghost About thee, with pale looks and patient love, And bitter gusts of anguish, that shall cross The gentle spirit, when poor Angelo—A widow’s and a childless mother’s curse Rest on thy head, Rienzi! Live, till Rome
                  Hurl thee from thy proud seat; live but to provThe ecstasy of scorn, the fierce contempt That wait the tyrant fallen; then die, borne down By mighty justice!—die as a wild beast Before the hunters!—die, and leave a name Portentous, bloody, brief—a meteor name, Obscurely bad, or madly bright! My curse Rest on thy head, Rienzi."Help there! help!Camillo!Ay I know thou wast too late. Bring aid.—See! see! Her lips are colouring fast—she is not dead. Bring aid.My lord, Savelli, with a power Gathering in every street, comes on; the guards Flee, and the people hear the bell, nor flock To aid or rescue.Now, revenge! revenge! 
                     Savelli! Murderer, when next we meet,Thou shalt give blood for blood.She lives! Aid! aid! Her pulses beat again. Go, call her maids! Speed thee,Camillo! How shall I endure The unspoken curses of her eye: "how bear Her voice!" My child! my child! my beautiful—Whom I so loved! whom I have murdered! Claudia,Mine own beloved child! She would have given Her life for mine. Would I were dead!My lord—
                     Camillo, when I’m gone, be faithful to her,—"Be very faithful! Save her, shield her, better Than I, that was her father." She’ll not trouble theeLong, good Camillo; "the sure poison, grief, Rankles in those young veins." Yet cherish her,—She loved thee.My dear master—thou thyself—My business is to die. Watch o’er my child; And, soon as I am dead, conduct her safely To the small nunnery of the Ursulines, Her pious steps so often sought.—Away! 
                     She will not curse me dead.—She’ll pray for me,In that poor broken heart. Oh, blessings on thee,My child! mine own sweet child!My lord, Savelli
                  Comes on apace.Summon the people.They, too,Advance against thee.And for such I left The assured condition of my lowliness,—The laughing days, the peaceful nights, the joysOf a small quiet home; for such I risked Thy peace, my daughter. Abject, crouching slaves! False, fickle, treacherous, perjured slaves! how come they? How led, how armed, how number’d?They sweep on,A thickening cloud, as locusts, when they light On the green banks of Nile. The furious mother "Leads them, and saints revenge, in her fierce prayersAnd frantic imprecations.""Tis the fiendThat speediest answers to the daring call Of his mad worshippers. So be it."Some mix with their shouts the name Of mighty liberty.Oh, had I laid All earthly passion, pride, and pomp, and power,And high ambition, and hot lust of rule, Like sacrificial fruits, upon the altar Of Liberty, divinest Liberty! "Then—but the dream that filled my soul was vast As his whose mad ambition thinned the ranks Of the Seraphim, and peopled hell. These slaves!"Base crawling reptiles! May the curse of chains Cling to them ever. Seek the court, Alberti—Dismiss the guard—unbar the gates.—I’ll seek The people.Singly!Singly, sir.Come on! Why loiter ye? Ye that have sons, Ye that have known a mother’s love, come on;A woman leads to vengeance.Say, to justice.Look, look, the gates are barred. The Tribune means To stand a desperate siege. Bring axes, sirs,And fire. Consume the palace! hew the doors! Bring torches!Ay, with mine own hand I’ll light The accursed and murderous den; thy funeral pyre,My Angelo.Bring torches! hew the gates!Down with the tyrant! drag him forth.—Rienzi!Who calls upon Rienzi? Citizens,What seek ye of your Tribune?Give me back My son.Oh, that grim Death would give him back To Claudia! But the cold, cold grave—why come ye?For vengeance, perjured tyrant! for thy blood—for liberty!For liberty! Go seek Earth’s loftiest heights, and ocean’s deepest caves;Go where the sea snake and the eagle dwell,’Midst mighty elements—where nature is,And man is not, and ye may see afar, Impalpable as a rainbow on the clouds, The glorious vision! Liberty! I dream’dOf such a goddess once; dream’d that yon slaves Were Romans, such as ruled the world, and I Their Tribune;—vain and idle dream! Take back The symbol and the power. What seek ye more?Tyrant! thy life!Come on. Why pause ye, cowards? I am unarmed. My breast is bare. Why pause ye?Father!Oh, save her!Drag her from my neck,If ye be men! Save her! She never harmed A worm. My Claudia, bless thee! bless thee! Now—now!—Ay, that thrust pierced to the heart; he diesEven whilst I speak.Father!Alas! poor child!She bleeds, I fear, to death. Go bear her in,And treat the corse with reverence; for surely,Though stained with much ambition, he was one Of the earth’s great spirits.