Scene Venice---in the year 1355. ---An Antechamber in the Ducal Palace. Pietro speaks, in entering, to
					Battista Enter Vincenzo .  Exeunt. ---The Ducal Chamber. Marino Faliero, Doge; and his Nephew, Bertuccio
						Faliero. Enter the Secretary of the Forty.  Exeunt Secretary and Vincenzo Taking up the ducal cap. Puts it on. Enter Vincenzo .  Enter Vincenzo and Israel Bertuccio
						.
					 ---An Apartment in the Ducal Palace. Angiolina (wife of the Doge) and
						Marianna Enter the Doge and Pietro
						.
					 ---A retired spot near the Arsenal. Israel Bertuccio and Philip
					Calendaro Exeunt. ---Scene, the Space between the Canal and the Church of San Giovanni e San
					Paolo. An equestrian Statue before it.---A Gondola lies in the Canal at some
					distance. Enter the Doge alone, disguised.  (solus). Enter Israel Bertuccio .  Exeunt. ---The House where the Conspirators meet. (entering). Enter Israel Bertuccio
						, and the
						Doge
						, disguised.
					 The Doge discovers himself. The Conspirators salute the Doge and Israel
							Bertuccio, and retire, headed by Philip
							Calendaro. The Doge and Israel
							Bertuccio remain. Exeunt. ---Palazzo of the Patrician Lioni. Lioni laying aside the
					mask and cloak which the Venetian Nobles wore in public, attended by a Domestic.  Goes to an open lattice. A knocking is heard from without. Enter Antonio .  Going. Enter Antonio
						and other armed Domestics, who seize
						Bertram
						.
					 Re-enter Antonio .  Exeunt. ---The Ducal Palace---The Doge's Apartment. The Doge and his Nephew Bertuccio
					Faliero A pause. Enter a Signor of the Nightwith Guards etc., etc.
					 The great bell of St. Mark's tolls. Exit part of the Guard. The bell ceases to toll. Enter other Signors of the Night
						, with
						Bertuccio Faliero
						prisoner.
					 ---The Hall of the Council of Ten assembled with the additional Senators,
					who, on the Trials of the Conspirators for the Treason of Marino
						Faliero, composed what was called the Giunta,---Guards, Officers,
					etc., etc. Israel Bertuccio and Philip
						Calendaro as Prisoners. Bertram, Lioni, and
					Witnesses, etc. The Chief of the Ten, Benintende. Enter the Doge as Prisoner, with Guards, etc., etc.
					 Enter an Officer .  The Duchess enters.  Exeunt. ---The Doge's Apartment. The Doge as Prisoner, and the Duchess
					attending him. The Attendants of Angiolina enter, and surround their
					Mistress, who has fainted.---Exeunt the Doge, Guards, etc.,
					etc. ---The Court of the Ducal Palace; the outer gates are shut against the
					people.---The Doge enters in his ducal robes, in procession
					with the Council of Ten
					and other Patricians, attended by the Guards, till they arrive at the top of
						the "Giants' Staircase" (where the Doges took the oaths); the Executioner is
						stationed there with his sword.---On arriving, a
					Chief of the Ten
					takes off the ducal cap from the Doge's head.
				 The Doge throws himself upon his knees, and as the
					Executioner raises his sword the scene closes. ---The Piazza and Piazzetta of St. Mark's.--- The people in crowds gathered
					round the grated gates of the Ducal Palace, which are shut. The people murmur. Enter on the Balcony of the Palace which fronts St. Mark's Place a
						Chief of the Ten, with a bloody sword. He waves it thrice
					before the People, and exclaims, "Justice hath dealt upon the mighty Traitor!"
					The gates are opened; the populace rush in towards the "Giants' Staircase,"
					where the execution has taken place. The foremost of them exclaims to those
					behind, "The gory head rolls down the Giants' Steps!" The curtain falls.