Scene.---A Hall in the Royal Palace of Nineveh. ---A Hall in the Palace. solus Sound of soft music heard from within. Enter Sardanapalus effeminately dressed, his Head crowned
                    with Flowers, and his Robe negligently flowing, attended by a Train of Women and
                    young Slaves. speaking to some of his
                        attendants Sal. (comes forward and says)  addressing his train The court retiring. To Myrrha, who is going.  Exit Myrrha Enter Cupbearer. addressing the Cupbearer Exit Cupbearer. Re-enter Cupbearer, with wine. taking the cup from him Drinks. To the Cupbearer. Exit Cupbearer. Gives the signet.  Exit Salemenes solus Enter an Attendant Myrrha enters. apart to Attendant Addressing Myrrha. [Myrrha pauses. Enter Pania  Exit Sardanapalus solus Exit. ---The Portal of the same Hall of the Palace. solus Enter Arbaces by an inner door touching his scabbard Enter Balea. to Arb. aside Alternately to Bal.  Exit Balea Enter Salemenes Enter Guards. continuing delivering his drawing his sword. advancing drawing interposing to the Guards. The Guards attack Arbaces, who defends himself valiantly and
                    dexterously till they waver. Salemenes attacks Arbaces. Enter Sardanapalus and Train. To a Guard. Sardanapalus snatches a sword from one of the soldiers, and
                    rushes between the combatants---they separate. raising the sword showing the signet confused. Arbaces and Salemenes return their swords
                    to the scabbards. To a Guard. to Sal. delivering back the signet aside interrupting him Exeunt Sardanapalus, Salemenes, and the Train, etc., leaving
                        Arbaces and Beleses. Enter Pania. aside  Exit Pania Exit with Arbaces, who follows reluctantly. Enter Sardanapalus and Salemenes.  Exit Salemenes solus Enter Myrrha. Exeunt. ---The Hall of the Palace illuminated---Sardanapalus and his
                    Guests at Table.---A storm without, and Thunder occasionally heard during the
                    Banquet. Zames and the Guests kneel, and exclaim--- It thunders as they kneel; some start up in confusion. Enter Pania, with his sword and garments bloody, and
                    disordered. The guests rise in confusion. to the Guards He hesitates.  Exit Sfero for the armour. to his Attendant.  Exit Pania Exeunt Zames, Altada, and all save
                    Myrrha Enter Sfero and others with the King's Arms, etc. arming himself In going stops short, and turns to Sfero  Exit Sfero. Re-enter Sfero with the mirror. looking at himself Flings away the helmet after trying it again. Exeunt Sardanapalus and Sfero. She draws forth a small vial. Enter Altada.  Exit Altada 
                    Enter an Officer.
                 Exit Officer. sola Enter Pania. Enter Sardanapalus and Salemenes with
                    Soldiers. Pania quits Myrrha, and ranges
                    himself with them. Pania returns towards Myrrha. Enter Beleses and Arbaces with the
                    Rebels. They charge the King and Salemenes with their troops,
                        who defend themselves till the arrival of Zames with the
                        Guard before mentioned. The Rebels are then driven off, and pursued by
                            Salemenes, etc. As the King is going to join the
                        pursuit, Beleses crosses him.  They fight; Beleses is wounded and disarmed. raising his sword to despatch him, exclaims A party of Rebels enter and rescue Beleses. They assail
                        the King, who in turn, is rescued by a Party of his Soldiers, who drive the
                        Rebels off. Exit in pursuit. to Pan.  Exit Myrrha  Exit Pania Enter Altada and
                        Sfero by an opposite door. Exeunt. Enter Salemenes and Soldiers, etc. Enter Sardanapalus, cum suis, etc., and
                        Myrrha. They place a seat. smiling They bring water---he drinks. to the Attendants. aside Aloud. in retiring  Exit Salemenes smiling Exeunt omnes. Sardanapalus discovered sleeping upon a Couch, and
                    occasionally disturbed in his slumbers, with Myrrha
                    watching. sola, gazing awakening He pauses. Enter Salemenes  Exit Myrrha.  Exit Salemenes Re-enter Salemenes and Zarina.  Exit Salemenes. He hesitates. Enter Salemenes. striving to conduct her conducting her off the stage She faints. advancing Aside. Salemenes bears her off. solus Enter Myrrha He kisses her. Enter Salemenes. A trumpet sounds without. Trumpet sounds again. Exeunt. ---The same Hall in the Palace. Myrrha and Balea at a window Enter Soldiers, bearing in Salemenes wounded, with a broken
                    javelin in his side: they seat him upon one of the couches which furnish the
                    Apartment. Exeunt the Soldiers. Enter Sardanapalus and Soldiers. despondingly He draws out the weapon from the wound, and dies. Embraces the body.  Exeunt Soldiers with the body of Salemenes Enter. Pania. Enter an Officer, hastily.  Exeunt Pania and the Officer.  Re-enter Pania. Gives a key.  Exit Pania Pania, returning with a Herald. showing a ring. ironically 
                    Pania and the Guards seizing him.  Exit Herald. Soldiers enter, and form a Pile about the Throne, etc. The Soldiers and Pania throng round him, kissing his hand
                    and the hem of his robe.  Exeunt Pania and Soldiers.  Exit Myrrha. solus Myrrha returns with a lighted Torch in one Hand, and a Cup
                    in the other. Sardanapalus takes the cup, and after drinking and
                        tinkling the reversed cup, as a drop falls, exclaims---  The trumpet of Pania sounds without. He mounts the pile. Myrrha fires the pile. As Myrrhasprings forward to throw herself into the flames,
                    the Curtain falls.