Scene—An Apartment in Whitehall. Enter Ireton, Harrison, and Pride, to Downes and
                           Marten.
                      Enter Cromwel. 
                     (Aside) (Exit Downes.)  (Exit Marten.) (Exit Harrison.) 
                     (To Pride) (During the next few speeches Cromwell walks up and down the stage, now speaking to himself, now looking at the weather, now asking questions, without attending to the answers, evidently absorbed in thought.)  (Exit Pride.) Re-enter Harrison and Pride.
                   Exeunt HarrisonandIreton.
                   Exeunt. —An Apartment in Carisbrooke
                        Castle. The KingandHerbert
                (Enter Hammond.) 
                     Enter Lord Salisbury, Lord Say, Sir Harry
                        Vane, and other Commissioners,
                     some of them Ministers.   
                     Harrison heard without. Enter Harrison. (to Salisbury) (to Harrison) (to the King) END OF THE FIRST ACT. Scene—The Painted Chamber. A table at which
                     are seated Commissioners, Lawyers, &c.;  A gothic window behind the table, through which objects that pass may be seen. 
                  Bradshaw, Fairfax, Ireton, Downes, Cook,
                     Marten, Tichburn, &c. Fairfax comes forward, followed by
                           Bradshaw, Ireton,
                        and Downes. (Exit Fairfax.) Enter Cromwell. (Aside)  (going to the table) (The King, Herbert, 
                  Harrison, &c. pass the window) (The Scene closes.) —A Gallery leading to the 
                     King's
                           Prison. The Queen, Lady Fairfax, a
                  Centinel. Enter Cromwell.
                (Exeunt Queen and Centinel ) (Exeunt.) —The King's Apartments The King and Herbert. (Exit Herbert) Enter the Queen
                   Enter Cromwell.  END OF THE SECOND ACT. 
                  Westminster Hall fitted up for the King's
                        trial. 
                  Bradshaw, seated as President; Cromwell, Ireton, Harrison, Downes, Marten, Tichburne, and other Judges on benches; Cook, and other Lawyers, Clerks, &c., at a table; a chair of State for the King on one side; the Queen, veiled, and other Ladies in a Gallery behind; the whole stage filled with Guards Spectators, &c., &c. (to Cromwell) Enter the King, Herbert, and other Servants, Hacker and guards. (The Soldiers &c. as the King walks to his chair cry Justice! Justice!) (A pause of a few moments during which the head of the King's
                        staff on which he was leaning falls and rolls across the stage.) (to Ireton) (Cromwell is
                        sworn.) (to Downes) 
                        (Aloud)
                      (The Judges all stand up.) 
                     (from the Gallery) (To Ireton) (aloud) (rushing to the King) (Exit the Queen, led.) The Judges all stand up.  (Soldiers &c. cry "On to Execution!" "Justice and
                        Execution!" END OF THE THIRD ACT.  An Apartment in Cromwell's House. 
                  Cromwell alone. Enter Ireton. Enter a Servant. (Exit Ireton.) 
                  (Exeunt.)
                (Exeunt.)  The Painted Chamber.
                
                  Bradshaw, Harrison, Cook, Downes, Tichburne, Marten, and other Judges. (Enter Cromwell.) (then aside to Bradshaw and Harrison
                    (then aloud) (signs.) (Marking Marten's cheek
                     with a pen.)  (signs.) (Cromwell,Marten, and Downesadvance to the front)  (Seizing one of the Judges and going with him to the table.) (A trumpet heard without) (Exit Marten.) Exit Cromwell. (The Scene closes.) The —The King's Apartments. Enter the King leading in the Princess Elizabethand the Duke of Gloucester. Enter Herbert. Enter Cromwell.
                   Exeunt Herbertand the Children. End of the Fourth Act.  The King's Bedchamber.  >(On account of the length of the Tragedy, this scene is
                        omitted in representation.) The King, starting from his couch;Herbert asleep. Enter the Queen. Exit Herbert. (Exit Queen.) Exit. —The Banquetting-House at Whitehall, glass folding-doors opening to the Scaffold, which is covered with black. The block, axe, &c. visible ; Officers and other persons are busy inthe background, and Cromwell is also there giving directions.
                (at the back of the Stage) (advancing to the front of the Stage.) Enter Fairfax.  Exeunt FairfaxandHarrison.  
                     Cromwell gives
                           the Warrant to Hacker.) (Exit Hacker.) 
                     Bradshaw, Cook, Marten, and others. Enter the King, Hacker,
                     Herbert, a Bishop, Guards, &c. 
                  Herbert gives the
                        King a letter. (Exeunt King, Herbert, Bishop, and Guards. A
                        pause.)  (Scream without.)  (Exit Ireton.) (Exit and the Scene closes.) Another Gallery in Whitehall. Enter Cromwell. (without) Enter the Queen
             Enter Lady
               Fairfax
             Enter Ireton, on one side,
                  followed by Fairfax and Harrison on the other.