An Apartment in the Royal Palace. An Apartment in the Royal Palace. Julian sleeping on a Couch. Annabel. Enter Alfonso as Theodore Alfonso retires behind the couch, out of Julian’s sight. Going to Julian, whilst Alfonso keeps behind the couch, out of his sight Alfonso approaches Julian seeing Alfonso Exit Annabel.  Enter Annabel.  Julian sinks on his knees before the couch; Alfonso and
								Annabel go to him, and the scene falls. End of the First Act. A splendid Hall of Audience in the Royal Palace. D’Alba and Bertone.  Exit Bertone Enter Calvi, followed by other Nobles. Approaching to meet the other Lords as they enter. giving
								                		a letter to Calvi. Enter Valore and other Nobles. reads reads Enter Leanti Enter Melfi. aside aloud  to D’Alba Exit Calvi aside aloud Enter Calvi, followed by Julian. Exeunt D’Alba, Leanti, Valore, Calvi &c. Guns and shouts are heard without. Guns, bells, and shouts again. Shouts again. Guns without. Guns again. Exit Melfi.  Rushes out. END OF THE SECOND ACT A Magnificent Cathedral. A Gothic Monument in the Foreground, with Steps round it, and the Figure of an old Warrior on the top. D’Alba, Leanti, Valore, Calvi, and other nobles. Enter Melfi, in Royal Robes, preceded by Nobles,
								Officers, &c. bearing the Crown, Archbishop, Bishops,
								&c. Enter Julian and Alfonso. to Alf. Pointing to Julian Exeunt Alfonso, Valore, and other nobles. Exit Melfi, guarded.  Exeunt Calvi and other Lords Enter Annabel . Exeunt D’Alba and Leanti Enter D’Alba, Calvi, Leanti and Nobles Exeunt. END OF THE THIRD ACT. An Apartment in the Royal Palace. D’Alba, Bertone. Exit Bertone. Re-enter Bertone with Renzi. Tossing him a purse. Exit Renzi. Exeunt severally. The Country just without the gates of Messina. A hilly back Ground. Melfi, lying on the Stage, Julian. Exit Julian.  Enter Julian.  Exit Julian. Enter Alfonso, Valore, and Calvi. Seeing Melfi. Exeunt Calvi and Valore. Enter Julian. Dies. Enter Paolo. Exit Julian. Exeunt. An Apartment in an old Tower; a rich Gothic Window,
								closed, but so constructed as that the Light may be thrown in, near
								it a small arched Door, beyond which is seen an Inner Chamber, with
								an open Casement.—Annabel is borne in by D’Alba and Guards, through a strong Iron Door in the side Scene. D’Alba, Annabel, Guards. Exeunt Guards. Exit D’Alba. After a pause. Exit. End of the Fourth Act The same as the last; the arched Door nearly closed. Annabel. A gun is heard without. Enter Julian through the arched Door. Enter Bertone, and two Murderers.  The two murderers have now advanced close to Julian. One of the murderers strikes at Julian with his sword; Annabel rushes before him, receives the wound aimed at him, and falls at his feet. (before she is wounded). Then after. dies.     fights and kills him. Exit the other murderer. Julian & Bertone fight, and Julian kills him. covering her with it. taking one belonging to the dead bravo. Enter D’Alba. entering to an Attendant uncovering the body  Enter Alfonso, Leanti, Valore, &c. Entering. Exit D’Alba guarded. Dies. THE END.