SCENE, CHIEFLY ROME. ---A Street in Rome.  Enter Servius and Cneius.   Enter Virginius and Titus .  Titus, Servius , and Cneius go out.
					  Enter Icilius .  Virginius goes out.   Enter Appius Claudius, Siccius Dentatus, Lucius, Titus, Servius,
							Marcus , and Citizens , shouting.  Citizens shout.  Aside. Appius and friends go out.  from behind. The crowd approach Dentatus, threateningly. Entering. Citizens go out, shouting.  They go out. ---Virginius's House.  Enter Virginius and Servia .  Servia goes out.   Enter Virginia .  Greatly confused. Virginia goes out.  Re-entering with a painting. Enter Dentatus .]  Aside. Virginius and Dentatus go out.  
						Icilius , entering.  Virginia covers her face with her hands.   Enter Virginius and Dentatus behind.
					 Going, is met by
							Virginius .  They go out. ---A Street.  Enter Publius and Sextus .   Enter Numitorius .  Soldiers go out.  Enter Lucius .  They go out. ---Virginius's House.  Enter Virginius, Icilius, Numitorius, Lucius , and others.  shows a parchment to Icilius ]  Goes out.  Enter Virginius , conducting Virginia
						, with Numitorius .  Kissing her.] Icilius rushes
						towards Virginius , and kneels.  Virginius and the rest retire.  Kisses her.  Re-enter Virginius , and the others.  To Servia . They go out. ---Appius's House.  Enter Appius.
				  Enter Claudius.
				  Enter Marcus .  They go out. ---The Forum.  Enter Dentatus , with Titus, Servius , and
					Citizens .  The people shout. Shouts from the people.] Dentatus goes out.  Aside. Appius ascends the tribunal.  To Marcus . To a Plebeian. Virginia at this moment crosses the stage with her
						Nurse, and is met by Numitorius , who holds her in
						conversation: Appius rivets his eyes upon her.  Takes her a little farther from the tribunal. Descends, and approaches
							Claudius with precipitation.  Marcus goes out.  Goes out with Servia .  Numitorius goes out.  They go out severally. ---Appius's House. entering. Enter Claudius. They go out severally. ---A Street in Rome.  Enter Lucius , meeting Titus, Servius ,
					and Cneius .  A shriek without.  Enter Claudius , dragging along
							Virginia , followed by Servia and
						others.  They go out. ---The Forum.  Enter Appius, preceded by Lictors.  Looking out] Listens. Appius ascends the tribunal--- Claudius
						enters, still holding Virginia , followed by
							Servia , Women, and Citizens .   Enter Numitorius .  With much vehemence---recollects himself.] Aside.] entering Rushes to her. Falls fainting in his arms. The Lictors and Claudius are driven back;
							Claudius takes refuge at Appius's
						feet, who has descended, and throws up his arms as a signal to both parties
						to desist ---whereupon the people retire a little.  They hold up their hands. Appius, Claudius , and Lictors go out.  They go out severally. ---The Camp.  Enter S. Oppius and Q. F. Vibulanus .   Enter
							Marcus .  They go out. ---A Mountainous Pass.  The body of Dentatus discovered on a bier--- Soldiers
					mourning over it.   Trumpets---Enter Virginius and Soldiers .  without Luc. entering Virginius rushes out, followed by
					Lucius. ---Numitorius's House. 
					Virginia discovered, supported by Servia .   Enter Numitorius; Virginia looks at him inquisitively
						for some time.  entering To Numitorius
					 Icilius looks earnestly at Numitorius ,
						who fixes his eyes steadfastly on the ground: Icilius
						droops his head.  without Shrieks and rushes into her father's arms, who enters at the
						moment. They go out. ---The Forum.  Enter Appius and Lictors .   Enter Marcus .  Marcus goes out.  entering  Enter Claudius .  Marcus goes out.]  Appius ascends his tribunal.   Enter Numitorius, Icilius, Lucius , Citizens ,
							Virginius leading his Daughter, Servia
						, and Citizens .---A dead silence prevails.  Virginius , stepping forward to speak, is withheld by
							Numitorius .  Retires. starting forward Brings Virginia forward.  Troops appear
						behind. Aside. Aside. Aside. The people make a show of resistance, but, upon the advancing of the
						soldiers, retreat, and leave Icilius, Virginius , and his
						daughter, &c. in the hands of Appius and his party.  Icilius is forced off.  Virginius , perfectly at a loss what to do, looks
						anxiously around the Forum; at length his eye falls on a butcher's stall
						with a knife upon it.  Virginius secures the knife.  Virginia shrieks, and falls half-dead upon her father's
						shoulder.  Kissing her. Stabs her, and draws out the knife.
							Icilius breaks from the Soldiers that held him, and
						catches her.  Goes out through the Soldiers. ---A Street.  Enter Appius and Marcus .   Enter Vibulanus , hastily, and other Decemvirs, with
							Marcus .  without 
						Icilius enters, with Honorius and
							Valerius as Consuls, Numitorius and
						Lictors .  Appius and Lictors go out on one side;
							Icilius and Numitorius on the other.
					 They go out severally. ---Virginius's House.  Enter Lucius and Servia .   Enter Virginius , attended by
							Numitorius and others.   Enter Icilius .  taking Virginius's hand. Icilius goes out.  Laughs.  Enter Lucius .  Goes out, followed by all but Lucius and
							Servia .  Goes out, and almost immediately returns. Virginius rushes out, followed by Lucius,
						Servia , and others.  ---A Dungeon. 
					Appius discovered.  He is on the point of swallowing poison, when Vibulanus
						enters.  Goes out. rushing in showing his fingers]. Searches about his clothes. They go out, struggling.  Enter Numitorius, Icilius, Lucius , Guard , and Soldier
						, bearing Virginia's urn.  They go out. ---Another Dungeon. 
					Virginius discovered on one knee, with Appius
					lying dead before him. Enter Numitorius, Icilius, Lucius ,
					Citizens , and others.  Icilius places the urn in his hand.  Virginius looks alternately at Icilius and
					the urn ---looks at Numitorius and Lucius
					---seems struck by his mourning---looks at the urn again---bursts into a passion
					of tears, and exclaims, "Virginia!" ---Falls on
						Icilius's neck. Curtain drops. 